TITLE: Acquiring the principles of mathematics and science
INDEX: 4
============================================================

Acquiring the principles of mathematics and science

A It has been pointed out that learning mathematics and science is not so much
learning facts as learning ways of thinking. It has also been emphasised that in order
to learn science, people often have to change the way they think in ordinary
situations. For example, in order to understand even simple concepts such as heat
and temperature, ways of thinking of temperature as a measure of heat must be
abandoned and a distinction between ‘temperature’ and ‘heat’ must be learned.

These changes in ways of thinking are often referred to as conceptual changes. But
how do conceptual changes happen? How do young people change their ways of
thinking as they develop and as they learn in school?

B Traditional instruction based on telling students how modern scientists think does
not seem to be very successful. Students may learn the definitions, the formulae, the
terminology, and yet still maintain their previous conceptions. This difficulty has
been illustrated many times, for example, when instructed students are interviewed
about heat and temperature. It is often identified by teachers as a difficulty in
applying the concepts learned in the classroom; students may be able to repeat a
formula but fail to use the concept represented by the formula when they explain
observed events.

C The psychologist Piaget suggested an interesting hypothesis relating to the
process of cognitive change in children. Cognitive change was expected to result
from the pupils’ own intellectual activity. When confronted with a result that
challenges their thinking - that is, when faced with conflict - pupils realise that they
need to think again about their own ways of solving problems, regardless of whether
the problem is one in mathematics or in science. He hypothesised that conflict
brings about disequilibrium, and then triggers equilibration processes that
ultimately produce cognitive change. For this reason, according to Piaget and his
colleagues, in order for pupils to progress in their thinking they need to be actively
engaged in solving problems that will challenge their current mode of reasoning.
However, Piaget also pointed out that young children do not always discard their
ideas in the face of contradictory evidence. They may actually discard the evidence
and keep their theory.
D Piaget’s hypothesis about how cognitive change occurs was later translated into
an educational approach which is now termed ‘discovery learning’. Discovery
learning initially took what is now considered the Tone learner’ route. The role of the
teacher was to select situations that challenged the pupils’ reasoning; and the
pupils’ peers had no real role in this process. However, it was subsequently
proposed that interpersonal conflict, especially with peers, might play an important
role in promoting cognitive change. This hypothesis, originally advanced by Perret-
Clermont (1980) and Doise and Mugny (1984), has been investigated in many recent
studies of science teaching and learning.

E Christine Howe and her colleagues, for example, have compared children’s
progress in understanding several types of science concepts when they are given
the opportunity to observe relevant events. In one study, Howe compared the
progress of 8 to 12-year-old children in understanding what influences motion down
a slope. In order to ascertain the role of conflict in group work, they created two
kinds of groups according to a pre-test: one in which the children had dissimilar
views, and a second in which the children had similar views.

They found support for the idea that children in the groups with dissimilar views progressed
more after their training sessions than those who had been placed in groups with similar
views. However, they found no evidence to support the idea that the children worked out
their new conceptions during their group discussions, because progress was not actually
observed in a post-test immediately after the sessions of group work, but rather in a second
test given around four weeks after the group work.

F In another study, Howe set out to investigate whether the progress obtained
through pair work could be a function of the exchange of ideas. They investigated
the progress made by 12-15-year-old pupils in understanding the path of falling
objects, a topic that usually involves conceptual difficulties. In order to create pairs
of pupils with varying levels of dissimilarity in their initial conceptions, the pupils’
predictions and explanations of the path of falling objects were assessed before
they were engaged in pair work. The work sessions involved solving computer-
presented problems, again about predicting and explaining the paths of falling
objects. A post-test, given to individuals, assessed the progress made by pupils in
their conceptions of what influenced the path of falling objects.

Questions 1-6

Reading Passage 2 has SIX paragraphs, A-F.

Choose the correct heading for paragraphs A-F from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-ix.


List of Headings
i A suggested modification to a theory about learning.

ii The problem of superficial understanding.
iii The relationship between scientific understanding and age.

iv The rejection of a widely held theory.

v The need to develop new concepts in daily life.

vi The claim that a perceived contradiction can assist mental development.

vii Implications for the training of science teachers.

viii An experiment to assess the benefits of exchanging views with a partner.

ix Evidence for the delayed benefits of disagreement between pupils.

1..................... Paragraph A

2..................... Paragraph B

3..................... Paragraph C

4..................... Paragraph D

5..................... Paragraph E

6..................... Paragraph F


Questions 7-8

Choose TWO letters, A-E.

The list below contains some possible statements about learning.

Which TWO of these statements are attributed to Piaget by the writer of the passage?
A Teachers can assist learning by explaining difficult concepts.

B Mental challenge is a stimulus to learning.

C Repetition and consistency of input aid cognitive development.

D Children sometimes reject evidence that conflicts with their preconceptions.
E Children can help each other make cognitive progress.


Questions 9-10

Choose TWO letters, A-E.

Which TWO of these statements describe Howe’s experiment with 8-12-year-olds?

A The children were assessed on their ability to understand a scientific problem.

B All the children were working in mixed-ability groups.

C The children who were the most talkative made the least progress.

D The teacher helped the children to understand a scientific problem.
E The children were given a total of three tests, at different times.


Questions 11-13

Complete the summary below.

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.


How children learn

Piaget proposed that learning takes place when children encounter ideas that do not
correspond to their current beliefs. The application of this theory gave rise to a teaching
method known as 11.....................

At first this approach only focused on the relationship between individual pupils and their
12......................

Later, researchers such as Perret-Clermont became interested in the role that
interaction with 13..................... might also play in a pupil’s development..

Solution:

8. B OR D IN
1. v
EITHER ORDER
9. A OR E IN
2. ii
EITHER ORDER
10. A OR E IN
3. vi
EITHER ORDER
11. discovery
4. i
learning
5. iv 12. teacher
6. viii 13. peers
7. B OR D IN
EITHER ORDER
