TITLE: Advantages of public transport
INDEX: 7
============================================================

Advantages of public transport


A new study conducted for the World Bank by Murdoch University's Institute for Science
and Technology Policy (ISTP) has demonstrated that public transport is more efficient than
cars. The study compared the proportion of wealth poured into transport by thirty-seven
cities around the world. This included both the public and private costs of building,
maintaining and using a transport system.

The study found that the Western Australian city of Perth is a good example of a city with
minimal public transport. As a result, 17% of its wealth went into transport costs.

Some European and Asian cities, on the other hand, spent as little as 5%. Professor Peter
Newman, ISTP Director, pointed out that these more efficient cities were able to put the
difference into attracting industry and jobs or creating a better place to live.

According to Professor Newman, the larger Australian city of Melbourne is a rather unusual
city in this sort of comparison. He describes it as two cities: 'A European city surrounded by
a car-dependent one'. Melbourne's large tram network has made car use in the inner city
much lower, but the outer suburbs have the same car-based structure as most other
Australian cities. The explosion in demand for accommodation in the inner suburbs of
Melbourne suggests a recent change in many people's preferences as to where they live.

Newman says this is a new, broader way of considering public transport issues. In the past,
the case for public transport has been made on the basis of environmental and social
justice considerations rather than economics. Newman, however, believes the study
demonstrates that 'the auto-dependent city model is inefficient and grossly inadequate in
economic as well as environmental terms'.
Bicycle use was not included in the study but Newman noted that the two most 'bicycle
friendly' cities considered - Amsterdam and Copenhagen - were very efficient, even though
their public transport systems were 'reasonable but not special'.
It is common for supporters of road networks to reject the models of cities with good public
transport by arguing that such systems would not work in their particular city. One objection
is climate. Some people say their city could not make more use of public transport because
it is either too hot or too cold. Newman rejects this, pointing out that public transport has
been successful in both Toronto and Singapore and, in fact, he has checked the use of
cars against climate and found 'zero correlation'.

When it comes to other physical features, road lobbies are on stronger ground. For
example, Newman accepts it would be hard for a city as hilly as Auckland to develop a
really good rail network. However, he points out that both Hong Kong and Zurich have
managed to make a success of their rail systems, heavy and light respectively, though
there are few cities in the world as hilly.

A

In fact, Newman believes the main reason for adopting one sort of transport over another is
politics: 'The more democratic the process, the more public transport is favored.' He
considers Portland, Oregon, a perfect example of this. Some years ago, federal money was
granted to build a new road. However, local pressure groups forced a referendum over
whether to spend the money on light rail instead. The rail proposal won and the railway
worked spectacularly well. In the years that have followed, more and more rail systems
have been put in, dramatically changing the nature of the city. Newman notes that Portland
has about the same population as Perth and had a similar population density at the time.

B

In the UK, travel times to work had been stable for at least six centuries, with people
avoiding situations that required them to spend more than half an hour travelling to work.
Trains and cars initially allowed people to live at greater distances without taking longer to
reach their destination. However, public infrastructure did not keep pace with urban sprawl,
causing massive congestion problems which now make commuting times far higher.
C

There is a widespread belief that increasing wealth encourages people to live farther out
where cars are the only viable transport. The example of European cities refutes that. They
are-often wealthier than their American counterparts but have not generated the same level
of car use. In Stockholm, car use has actually fallen in recent years as the city has become
larger and wealthier. A new study makes this point even more starkly. Developing cities in
Asia, such as Jakarta and Bangkok, make more use of the car than wealthy Asian cities
such as Tokyo and Singapore. In cities that developed later, the World Bank and Asian
Development Bank discouraged the building of public transport and people have been
forced to rely on cars -creating the massive traffic jams that characterize those cities.

D

Newman believes one of the best studies on how cities built for cars might be converted to
rail use is The Urban Village report, which used Melbourne as an example. It found that
pushing everyone into the city centre was not the best approach. Instead, the proposal
advocated the creation of urban villages at hundreds of sites, mostly around railway
stations.

E

It was once assumed that improvements in telecommunications would lead to more
dispersal in the population as people were no longer forced into cities. However, the ISTP
team's research demonstrates that the population and job density of cities rose or
remained constant in the 1980s after decades of decline. The explanation for this seems to
be that it is valuable to place people working in related fields together. 'The new world will
largely depend on human creativity, and creativity flourishes where people come together
face-to-face.'

Questions 1-5

Reading Passage has five marked paragraphs, A-E.

Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-viii, in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.


List of Headings
i Avoiding an overcrowded centre
ii A successful exercise in people power
iii The benefits of working together in cities
iv Higher incomes need not mean more cars
v Economic arguments fail to persuade
vi The impact of telecommunications on population distribution
vii Increases in travelling time
viii Responding to arguments against public transport


1 Paragraph A 1.....................

2 Paragraph B 2.....................

3 Paragraph C 3.....................

4 Paragraph D 4.....................

5 Paragraph E 5.....................


Questions 6-10

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?

In boxes 6-10 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this


6..................... The ISTP study examined public and private systems in every city of the
world.
7..................... Efficient cities can improve the quality of life for their inhabitants.

8..................... An inner-city tram network is dangerous for car drivers.

9..................... In Melbourne, people prefer to live in the outer suburbs.

10..................... Cities with high levels of bicycle usage can be efficient even when public
transport is only averagely good.


Questions 11-13

Look at the following cities ( Questions 11-13) and the list of descriptions below.

Match each city with the correct description, A-F.

Write the correct letter, A-F, in boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet.


List of Descriptions

A successfully uses a light rail transport system in hilly environment
B successful public transport system despite cold winters

C profitably moved from road to light rail transport system

D hilly and inappropriate for rail transport system

E heavily dependent on cars despite widespread poverty

F inefficient due to a limited public transport system

11 Perth 11.....................

12 Auckland 12.....................

13 Portland 13.....................

Solution:

1. ii 8. NOT GIVEN
2. vii 9. FALSE

3. iv 10. TRUE
4. i 11. F

5. iii 12. D
6. FALSE 13. C

7. TRUE
