TITLE: Agriculture and Tourism
INDEX: 9
============================================================

Agriculture and Tourism

A. Linkages between the Agri-Food Sector and Tourism offer significant opportunities for
the development of both sectors within the region. These linkages could lead to ensuring
the sustainability of the region’s tourism product thus ensuring it preservation. Agriculture
and tourism — two of Wisconsin’s most industries — are teaming up in southwestern
Wisconsin has found that tourists, rural communities, and some farmers could benefit from
stronger efforts to promote and market agricultural tourism there. In 1990, agricultural
tourism project members surveyed 290 visitors to the annual Monroe Cheese Festival and
164 visitors to the Picnic on the Farm, a one-time event held in Platteville in conjunction
with the Chicago Bears summer training camp. More than one-half of those surveyed
responded favorably to a proposed tour, saying they would be interested in participating in
some type of agricultural tour in southwestern Wisconsin. Survey respondents reported that
they would prefer to visit cheese factories, sausage processing plants, dairy farms, and
historical farm sites, as well as enjoy an old-fashioned picnic dinner. The study also found
strong interest in visiting specialty farms (strawberries, cranberries, poultry, etc.). More than
75 percent of the Cheese Day visitors planned ahead for the trip, with 37 percent planning
at least two months in advance.
B. More than 40 percent of the visitors came to Monroe for two- or three-day visits. Many
stopped at other communities on their way to Cheese Days. Visitors at both events
indicated that they were there to enjoy themselves and were willing to spend money on
food and arts and crafts. They also wanted the opportunity to experience the “country”
while there. The study found that planning around existing events should take into account
what brought visitors to the area and provide additional attractions that will appeal to them.
For example, visitors to Cheese Days said they were on a holiday and appeared to be
more open to various tour proposals. Picnic visitors came specifically to see the Chicago
Bears practice. They showed less interest in a proposed agricultural tour than Cheese Day
visitors, but more interest in a picnic dinner.


C. The study identified three primary audiences for agricultural tourism: 1) elderly people
who take bus tours to see the country; 2) families interested in tours that could be enjoyed
by both parents and children; and 3) persons already involved in agriculture, including
international visitors. Agricultural tourism can serve to educate urban tourists about the
problems and challenges facing farmers, says Andy Lewis, Grant county community
development agent. While agriculture is vital to Wisconsin, more and more urban folk are
becoming isolated from the industry. In fact, Lewis notes, farmers are just as interested in
the educational aspects of agricultural tours as they are in any financial returns.

D. “Farmers feel that urban consumers are out of touch with farming,” Lewis says. “If
tourists can be educated on issues that concern farmers, those visits could lead to policies
more favorable to agriculture.” Animal rights and the environment are examples of two
issues that concern both urban consumers and farmers. Farm tours could help consumers
get the farmer’s perspective on these issues, Lewis notes. Several Wisconsin farms
already offer some type of learning experience for tourists. However, most agricultural
tourism enterprises currently market their businesses independently, leading to a lack of a
concerted effort to promote agricultural tourism as an industry.
E. Lewis is conducting the study with Jean Murphy, assistant community development
agent. Other participants include UW-Platteville Agricultural Economist Bob Acton, the

Center for Integrated Agricultural Systems, UW-Extension Recreation Resources Center,
the Wisconsin Rural Development Center, and Hidden Valleys, a Southwestern Wisconsin
regional tourism organization. This past fall, Murphy organized several workshops with
some Green and Grant County farmers, local business leaders, and motor coach tour
operators to discuss how best to organize and put on farm tours. Committees were formed
to look at the following: tour site evaluations, inventory of the area’s resources, tour
marketing, and familiarization of tours. The fourth committee is organizing tours for people
such as tour bus guides and local reporters to help better educate them about agricultural
tourism. Green County farmers already have experience hosting visitors during the annual
Monroe Cheese Days. Green county Tourism Director Larry Lindgren says these farmers
are set to go ahead with more formal agricultural tours next year. The tours will combine a
farm visit with a visit to a local cheese factory and a picnic lunch.

F. Another farm interested in hosting an organized tour is Sinsinawa, a 200-acre Grant
County farm devoted to sustainable agriculture and run by the Dominican Sisters.
Education plays a major role at the farm, which has an orchard, dairy and beef cows, and
hogs. Farm tours could be combined with other activities in the area such as trips to the
Mississippi River and/or visits to historical towns orlandmarks, Lewis says. The project will
help expose farmers to the tourism industry and farm vacations as a way to possibly
supplement incomes, he adds. While farm families probably wouldn’t make a lot of money
through farm tours, they would be compensated for their time, says Lewis. Farmers could
earn additional income through the sale of farm products, crafts, and recreational activities.

Questions 1-4

The reading Passage has six paragraphs A-F.

Which paragraph contains the following information? Write the correct letter A- F,
inboxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.

1..................... About half of all the tourists would spend several days in Monroe.


2..................... Most visitors responded positively to a survey project on farm tour.


3..................... Cooperation across organisations in research for agriculture tours has been
carried out.

4..................... Agriculture tour assist tourists to understand more issues concerning animal
and environment.


Questions 5-9

Which of following statements belongs to the visitor categories in the box
Please choose A, B or C for each question.

Write the correct letter A, B or C, in boxes 5-9 on your answer sheet.

NB: You may use any letter more than once.

A. Cheese Festival visitors

B. Picnic visitors

C. Both of them

———————

5..................... have focused destination
6..................... majority prepare well before going beforehand.

7..................... are comparably less keen on picnic meal

8..................... show interest in activities such as visiting factory tour and fruit

9..................... are willing to accept a variety of tour recommendation.


Questions 10-14

Summary

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage 1, using no more
than two words from the Reading Passage 1 for each answer. Write your answers in
boxes 10-14 on your answer sheet.
Through farm tour, visitors can better understand significant issues such as
10..................... and enviroment. In autumn, Murphy organised 11..................... and bring
other participants together to develop local tour market. Larry Lindgren said the farmers
already had experience of farm tours with factory visiting and a 12......................
In Sinsinawa, a large area of the farmland contains an orchard, cow etc which is managed
and operated by 13.....................; Lewis said the project will probably bring extra
14..................... for local farmers.

Solution:

1. B 8. C
2. A 9. A

3. E 10. animal rights
4. D 11. workshops

5. B 12. picnic
6. A 13. dominican sisters

7. A 14. incomes
