TITLE: Air pollution
INDEX: 12
============================================================

Air pollution

Part One

A

Air pollution is increasingly becoming the focus of government and citizen concern around
the globe. From Mexico City and New York, to Singapore and Tokyo, new solutions to this
old problem are being proposed, Mailed and implemented with ever increasing speed. It is
feared that unless pollution reduction measures are able to keep pace with the continued
pressures of urban growth, air quality in many of the world’s major cities will deteriorate
beyond reason.

B

Action is being taken along several fronts: through new legislation, improved enforcement
and innovative technology. In Los Angeles, state regulations are forcing manufacturers to
try to sell ever cleaner cars: their first of the cleanest, titled "Zero Emission Vehicles’, hove
to be available soon, since they are intended to make up 2 per cent of sales in 1997. Local
authorities in London are campaigning to be allowed to enforce anti-pollution lows
themselves; at present only the police have the power to do so, but they tend to be busy
elsewhere. In Singapore, renting out toad space to users is the way of the future.

C

When Britain’s Royal Automobile Club monitored the exhausts of 60,000 vehicles, it found
that 12 per cent of them produced more than half the total pollution. Older cars were the
worst offenders; though a sizeable number of quire new cars were also identified as gross
polluters, they were simply badly tuned. California has developed a scheme to get these
gross polluters off the streets: they offer a flat $700 for any old, run-down vehicle driven in
by its owner. The aim is to remove the heaviest-polluting, most decrepit vehicles from the
roads.

D
As part of a European Union environmental programme, a London council is resting an
infra-red spectrometer from the University of Denver in Colorado. It gauges the pollution
from a passing vehicle - more useful than the annual stationary rest that is the British
standard today - by bouncing a beam through the exhaust and measuring what gets
blocked. The councils next step may be to link the system to a computerised video camera
able to read number plates automatically.

E

The effort to clean up cars may do little to cut pollution if nothing is done about the
tendency to drive them more. Los Angeles has some of the world’s cleanest cars - far
better than those of Europe - but the total number of miles those cars drive continues to
grow. One solution is car-pooling, an arrangement in which a number of people who share
the same destination share the use of one car. However, the average number of people in
o car on the freeway in Los Angeles, which is 1.0, has been falling steadily. Increasing it
would be an effective way of reducing emissions as well as easing congestion. The trouble
is, Los Angeles seem to like being alone in their cars.

F

Singapore has for a while had o scheme that forces drivers to buy a badge if they wish to
visit a certain part of the city. Electronic innovations make possible increasing
sophistication: rates can vary according to road conditions, time of day and so on.
Singapore is advancing in this direction, with a city-wide network of transmitters to collect
information and charge drivers as they pass certain points. Such road-pricing, however,
can be controversial. When the local government in Cambridge, England, considered
introducing Singaporean techniques, it faced vocal and ultimately successful opposition.

Part Two


The scope of the problem facing the world’s cities is immense. In 1992, the United Nations
Environmental Programme and the World Health Organisation (WHO) concluded that all of
a sample of twenty megacities - places likely to have more than ten million inhabitants in
the year 2000 - already exceeded the level the WHO deems healthy in at least one major
pollutant. Two-thirds of them exceeded the guidelines for two, seven for three or more.

Of the six pollutants monitored by the WHO - carbon dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, ozone,
sulphur dioxide, lead and particulate matter - it is this last category that is attracting the
most attention from health researchers. PM10, a sub-category of particulate matter
measuring ten-millionths of a metre across, has been implicated in thousands of deaths a
year in Britain alone. Research being conducted in two counties of Southern California is
reaching similarly disturbing conclusions concerning this little- understood pollutant.

A world-wide rise in allergies, particularly asthma, over the past four decades is now said to
be linked with increased air pollution. The lungs and brains of children who grow up in
polluted air offer further evidence of its destructive power The old and ill, however, are the
most vulnerable to the acute effects of heavily polluted stagnant air. It con actually hasten
death, os it did in December 1991 when a cloud of exhaust fumes lingered over the city of
London for over a week.

The United Nations has estimated that in the year 2000 there will be twenty-four mega-
cities and a further eighty-five cities of more than three million people. The pressure on
public officials, corporations and urban citizens to reverse established trends in air pollution
is likely to grow in proportion with the growth of cities themselves. Progress is being made.
The question, though, remains the same: ‘Will change happen quickly enough?’

Questions 1-5

Look at the following solutions (Questions 1-5) and locations. Match each solution with one
location.

Write the appropriate locations in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any location more than once.

LOCATIONS

Singapore

Tokyo

London

New York

Mexico City

Cambridge

Los Angeles

SOLUTIONS


1 Manufacturers must sell cleaner cars. 1.....................
2 Authorities want to have power to enforce anti-pollution laws. 2.....................

3 Drivers will be charged according to the roads they use. 3.....................

4 Moving vehicles will be monitored for their exhaust emissions. 4.....................

5 Commuters are encouraged to share their vehicles with others. 5.....................


Questions 6-10

Do the following statements reflect the claims of the writer in Reading Passage?

In boxes 6-10 on your answer sheet write

YES if the statement reflects the claims of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this


6..................... According to British research, a mere twelve per cent of vehicles tested
produced over fifty per cent of total pollution produced by the sample group.

7..................... It is currently possible to measure the pollution coming from individual
vehicles whilst they are moving.

8..................... Residents of Los Angeles are now tending to reduce the yearly distances
they travel by car.

9..................... Car-pooling has steadily become more popular in Los Angeles in recent
years.

10..................... Charging drivers for entering certain parts of the city has been successfully
done in Cambridge, England.


Questions 11-13

Choose the appropriate letters A—D and write them in boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet.


11 How many pollutants currently exceed WHO guidelines in all megacities studied?

A one
B two

C three

D seven


12 Which pollutant is currently the subject of urgent research?

A nitrogen dioxide

B ozone

C lead
D particulate matter


13 Which of the following groups of people are the most severely affected by intense air
pollution?

A allergy sufferers
B children

C the old and ill

D asthma sufferers

Solution:

1. Los Angeles 8. NO
2. London 9. NO

3. Singapore 10. NO
4. London 11. A

5. Los Angeles 12. D
6. YES 13. C

7. YES
