TITLE: A little-known island community comes in from the cold
INDEX: 16
============================================================

A little-known island community comes in from the cold

Back in early 1961, few outside the corridors of dwindling British power had heard of the
archipelago centred on the main island of Tristan da Cunha, from which the scattered
islands that make up the group took their name.

It would take a dramatic volcanic eruption, and an emergency evacuation that would grab
the attention of the media, to bring attention to this mysterious outpost of the British
Empire. It seemed that the islands, no more than pin-pricks in the Southern Atlantic Ocean,
almost equidistant between Buenos Aires in South America and Cape Town in South
Africa, preferred not to be found.

The same can be said of the 290 or so residents of Tristan da Cunha at that time. They
lived on the remotest island on the entire planet.There was no airport, nor was there space
to build one on this mountainous carbuncle projecting from the ocean.The only harbour,
impenetrable during rough weather, was 1,500 miles distant from the nearest mainland
port. Cape Town. Communications with the outside world relied predominantly on signals
to passing fishing boats and the annual visit of the vessel that supplied the islanders with
the goods they could not produce themselves.

For this was a self-reliant community, proud of their ability to survive and help each other in
times of adversity. Colonised early in the 19th century, until December 1942, money had
not been exchanged on the island. However, war-time conditions and new development, in
particular a new fishing industry, saw the beginnings of links which meant that the islanders
had to accept they were now part of the modern world, however much the older members
of the community might resist such change.

The lives of the islanders ticked quietly along, largely ignored as the government of Britain
struggled with larger events on the world stage, until the beginning of August 1961. Earth
tremors and rock falls began on the 6th, but by October the situation had got so bad that
the island had to be evacuated.The entire population eventually found themselves in
England, where they were met with unwanted and unexpected attention from the media.
They were housed at a military camp just outside the port of Southampton.

Coming from a sub-tropical island and having had little exposure to the illnesses and chill
endured by the natives of the British Isles during winter, several of the elder islanders
succumbed. The government did not seem to know what to offer the islanders, there was
no news about what was happening to their homeland, and the future looked very
bleak.These were people who had built up their own way of life for over one hundred and
fifty years. They were a compact community who shared only seven family names between
them, and now it seemed that their way of life was to be destroyed.

Fortunately, and despite the islanders reluctance to have any dealings with the media, who
they suspected looked on them as historical curiosities, the attention helped keep their
plight in the public eye. Eventually, word came through that the island was again habitable
and, despite strong resistance from the British Government, the vast majority of the
islanders voted to return, turning their backs on the temptations of the brighter lights of their
temporary home in favour of their own.

The last of the returning islanders arrived in November 1963 and, with the rebuilding of the
crawfish canning industry and a growing demand for the island’s stamps amongst
dedicated collectors following the publicity caused hy the volcanic eniption, the local
economy soon recovered, although communications remained as difficult as they had ever
been. Michael Parsons, a young British teacher who was employed on the island, recalls
that there was no television and mail from the outside world arrived just eight times a year.

‘I was allowed to send a 100-word telegram home once a month,’he recalls,’and getting
news from home brought a lump to my throat’

Things have changed with developments in technology, but at the beginning of the present
century the island was again cut off from the rest of the world when, on May 23rd2001, a
hurricane tore through the area. It caused extensive damage, knocking out the radio station
and satellite telephone link as well as leaving the islanders without electricity. It would be a
week before news of the disaster reached London and several more weeks before a
rescue package could be agreed to help the islanders rebuild.

Today the island boasts its own internet café. For the first time people can see what the
items they wish to obtain from abroad actually look like before they purchase them – a big
bonus in a place where you have to wait many months to receive an order which might
prove to be unsuitable for the purpose you had in mind. At last, it seems, Tristan da Cunha
has joined the world.

Questions 1-2

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

1 The writer describes the islands of Tristan da Cunha as

A difficult to find in an emergency.

B a place the media didn’t understand.

C somewhere different countries claimed to own.
D unknown to most members of the public.

2 What does the writer say about the islanders?

A They could go for years with no contact with outsiders.

B They had no means of leaving the island to speak to others.

C They exchanged messages with boats that went past them.

D They travelled to the mainland on the supply ship.


Questions 3-8

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage? Write

YES if the statement agrees with the writers views

NO if the statement contradicts the writer s views

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

3..................... People living on Tristan da Cunha are totally self-sufficient.
4..................... The islanders often get ill.

5..................... Some islanders were reluctant to return after the volcanic eruption.

6..................... The selling of postage stamps has generated revenue for the islanders.

7..................... There is no television service on Tristan da Cunha.

8..................... Communications with the island are often interrupted.


Questions 9-14

Complete the summary.

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.

First colonised in the early part of the 19th century, Tristan da Cunha remained unknown
to many people in the rest of the world until a 9..................... forced the small population
of this remote island to evacuate their homes and brought their existence to the attention
of 10..................... . After spending two years as refugees in 11..................... , the British
Government reluctantly allowed them to return to the island once it had been established
that the danger had passed. The 12..................... of the island improved when rebuilding
work had been completed, partly because of a new interest in the 13.....................
Disaster was to strike the island again nearly forty years later when a 14.....................
destroyed many buildings on the island.

Solution:

1. D 8. NOT GIVEN
2. C 9. volcanic eruption

3. NO 10. the media
4. NOT GIVEN 11. England

5. YES 12. (local) economy
6. YES 13. island’s stamps

7. NOT GIVEN 14. hurricane
