TITLE: Antarctic Research
INDEX: 31
============================================================

Antarctic Research

A
A little over a century ago, men of the ilk of Scott, Shackleton and Mawson battled against
Antarctica’s blizzards, cold and deprivation. In the name of Empire and in an age of heroic
deeds they created an image of Antarctica that was to last well into the 20th century – an
image of remoteness, hardship, bleakness and isolation that was the province of only the
most courageous of men. The image was one of a place removed from everyday reality, of
a place with no apparent value to anyone.
B

As we enter the 21st century, our perception of Antarctica has changed. Although
physically Antarctica is no closer and probably no warmer, and to spend time there still
demands a dedication not seen in ordinary life, the continent and its surrounding ocean are
increasingly seen to an integral part of Planet Earth, and a key component in the Earth
System. Is this because the world seems a little smaller these days, shrunk by TV and
tourism, or is it because Antarctica really does occupy a central spot on Earth’s mantle?
Scientific research during the past half-century has revealed – and continues to reveal –
that Antarctica’s great mass and low temperature exert a major influence on climate and
ocean circulation, factors which influence the lives of millions of people all over the globe.

C
Antarctica was not always cold. The slow break-up of the super-continent Gondwana with
the northward movements of Africa, South America, India and Australia eventually created
enough space around Antarctica for the development of an Antarctic Circumpolar Current
(ACC), that flowed from west to east under the influence of the prevailing westerly winds.
Antarctica cooled, its vegetation perished, glaciation began and the continent took on its
present-day appearance. Today the ice that overlies the bedrock is up to 4km thick, and
surface temperatures as low as – 89.2deg C have been recorded. The icy blast that howls
over the ice cap and out to sea – the so-called katabatic wind – can reach 300 km/hr,
creating fearsome wind-chill effects.

D
Out of this extreme environment come some powerful forces that reverberate around the
world. The Earth’s rotation, coupled to the generation of cells of low pressure off the
Antarctic coast, would allow Astronauts a view of Antarctica that is as beautiful as it is
awesome. Spinning away to the northeast, the cells grow and deepen, whipping up the
Southern Ocean into the mountainous seas so respected by mariners. Recent work is
showing that the temperature of the ocean may be a better predictor of rainfall in Australia
than is the pressure difference between Darwin and Tahiti – the Southern Oscillation Index.
By receiving more accurate predictions, graziers in northern Queensland are able to avoid
overstocking in years when rainfall will be poor. Not only does this limit their losses but it
prevents serious pasture degradation that may take decades to repair. CSIRO is
developing this as a prototype forecasting system, but we can confidently predict that as
we know more about the Antarctic and the Southern Ocean we will be able to enhance and
extend our predictive ability.


E
The ocean’s surface temperature results from the interplay between deep-water
temperature, air temperature and ice. Each winter between 4 and 19 million square km of
sea ice form, locking up huge quantities of heat close to the continent. Only now can we
start to unravel the influence of sea ice on the weather that is experienced in southern
Australia. But in another way, the extent of sea ice extends its influence far beyond

Antarctica. Antarctic krill – the small shrimp-like crustaceans that are the staple diet for
baleen whales, penguins, some seals, flighted sea birds and many fish – breed well in
years when sea ice is extensive and poorly when it is not. Many species of baleen whales
and flighted sea birds migrate between the hemispheres and when the krill are less
abundant they do not thrive.

F
The circulatory system of the world’s oceans is like a huge conveyor belt, moving water
and dissolved minerals and nutrients from one hemisphere to the other, and from the
ocean’s abyssal depths to the surface. The ACC is the longest current in the world and has
the largest flow. Through it, the deep flows of the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans are
joined to form part of single global thermohaline circulation. During winter, the howling
katabatics sometimes scour the ice off patches of the sea’s surface leaving large ice-locked
lagoons, or ‘polynyas’. Recent research has shown that as fresh sea ice forms, it is
continuously stripped away by the wind and maybe blown up to 90km in a single day. Since
only freshwater freezes into ice, the water that remains becomes increasingly salty and
dense, sinking until it spills over the continental shelf. Coldwater carries more oxygen than
warm water, so when it rises, well into the northern hemisphere, it reoxygenates and
revitalises the ocean. The state of the northern oceans and their biological productivity owe
much to what happens in the Antarctic.

Questions 1-5

The reading Passage has seven paragraphs A-F
Which paragraph contains the following information?
Write the correct letter A-F, in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.

1..................... The example of research on weather prediction on agriculture
2..................... Antarctic sea ice brings life back to the world oceans’ vitality.
3..................... A food chain that influences the animals living pattern based on Antarctic
fresh sea ice

4..................... The explanation of how atmosphere pressure above Antarctica can impose
an effect on global climate change
5..................... Antarctica was once thought to be a forgotten and insignificant continent


Question 6-8

Summary
Please match the natural phenomenon with correct determined factor
Choose the correct answer from the box;
Write the correct letter A-F, in boxes 6-8 on your answer sheet.

6. Globally, mass Antarctica’s size and 6..................... influence climate change
7. 7..................... contributory to western wind
8. Southern Oscillation Index based on air pressure can predict 8..................... in Australia


A Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC)
B katabatic winds
C rainfall
D temperature
E glaciers
F pressure


Questions 9-13

Choose the correct letter A, B, C or D.
Write your answer in box 22-26 on your answer sheet.

9. In paragraph B, the author wants to tell which of the following truth about the
Antarctic?

A To show Antarctica has been a central topic of global warming in Mass media
B To illustrate its huge sea ice brings food to million lives to places in the world

C To show it is the heart and its significance to the global climate and current
D To illustrate it locates in the central spot on Earth geographically

10. Why do Australian farmers keep an eye on the Antarctic ocean temperature?
A Help farmers reduce their economic or ecological losses
B Retrieve grassland decreased in the overgrazing process
C Prevent animal from dying
D A cell provides fertilizer for the grassland

11. What is the final effect of katabatic winds?

A Increase the moving speed of ocean current
B Increase salt level near the ocean surface
C Bring fresh ice into southern oceans
D Pile up the mountainous ice cap respected by mariners

12. The break of the continental shelf is due to the

A Salt and density increase
B Salt and density decrease
C global warming resulting in a rising temperature
D fresh ice melting into ocean water

13. The decrease in the number of Whales and seabirds is due to

A killers whales are more active around
B Sea birds are affected by high sea level salty
C less sea ice reduces the productivity of food source
D seals fail to reproduce babies

Solution:

1. D 8. C
2. F 9. C

3. E 10. A
4. C 11. C

5. A 12. C
6. D 13. C

7. A
