TITLE: Ant Intelligence
INDEX: 32
============================================================

Ant Intelligence

When we think of intelligent members of the animal kingdom, the creatures that spring
immediately to mind are apes and monkeys. But in fact the social lives of some members
of the insect kingdom are sufficiently complex to suggest more than a hint of intelligence.

Among these, the world of the ant has come in for considerable scrutiny lately, and the idea
that ants demonstrate sparks of cognition has certainly not been rejected by those involved
in these investigations.

Ants store food, repel attackers and use chemical signals to contact one another in case of
attack. Such chemical communication can be compared to the human use of visual and
auditory channels (as in religious chants, advertising images and jingles, political slogans
and martial music) to arouse and propagate moods and attitudes. The biologist Lewis

Thomas wrote, Ants are so much like human beings as to be an embarrassment. They
farm fungi, raise aphids* as livestock, launch armies to war, use chemical sprays to alarm
and confuse enemies, capture slaves, engage in child labour, exchange information
ceaselessly. They do everything but watch television.'

However, in ants there is no cultural transmission -everything must be encoded in the
genes - whereas in humans the opposite is true. Only basic instincts are carried in the
genes of a newborn baby, other skills being learned from others in the community as the
child grows up. It may seem that this cultural continuity gives us a huge advantage
over ants. They have never mastered fire nor progressed. Their fungus farming and
aphid herding crafts are sophisticated when compared to the agricultural skills of humans
five thousand years ago but have been totally overtaken by modem human agribusiness.

Or have they? The farming methods of ants are at least sustainable. They do not
ruin environments or use enormous amounts of energy. Moreover, recent evidence
suggests that the crop farming of ants may be more sophisticated and adaptable than
was thought.
Ants were farmers fifty million years before humans were. Ants can't digest the cellulose in
leaves - but some fungi can. The ants therefore cultivate these fungi in their nests, bringing
them leaves to feed on, and then use them as a source of food. Farmer ants secrete
antibiotics to control other fungi that might act as 'weeds’, and spread waste to fertilise the
crop.

It was once thought that the fungus that ants cultivate was a single type that they had
propagated, essentially unchanged from the distant past. Not so. Ulrich Mueller
of Maryland and his colleagues genetically screened 862 different types of fungi taken from
ants' nests. These turned out to be highly diverse: it seems that ants are continually
domesticating new species. Even more impressively, DNA analysis of the fungi suggests
that the ants improve or modify the fungi by regularly swapping and sharing strains with
neighbouring ant colonies.

Whereas prehistoric man had no exposure to urban lifestyles - the forcing house
of intelligence - the evidence suggests that ants have lived in urban settings for close on a
hundred million years, developing and maintaining underground cities of specialised
chambers and tunnels.
When we survey Mexico City, Tokyo, Los Angeles, we are amazed at what has
been accomplished by humans. Yet Hoelldobler and Wilson’s magnificent work for ant
lovers, The Ants, describes a supercolony of the ant Formica yessensis on the Ishikari
Coast of Hokkaido. This ‘megalopolis’ was reported to be composed of 360 million workers
and a million queens living in 4,500 interconnected nests across a territory of 2.7 square
kilometres.
Such enduring and intricately meshed levels of technical achievement outstrip by
far anything achieved by our distant ancestors. We hail as masterpieces the cave
paintings in southern France and elsewhere, dating back some 20,000 years. Ant societies
existed in something like their present form more than seventy million years ago.
Beside this, prehistoric man looks technologically primitive. Is this then some kind
of intelligence, albeit of a different kind?

Research conducted at Oxford, Sussex and Zurich Universities has shown that
when desert ants return from a foraging trip, they navigate by integrating bearings
and distances, which they continuously update in their heads. They combine the evidence
of visual landmarks with a mental library of local directions, all within a framework which is
consulted and updated. So ants can learn too.

And in a twelve-year programme of work, Ryabko and Reznikova have found evidence that
ants can transmit very complex messages. Scouts who had located food in a maze
returned to mobilise their foraging teams. They engaged in contact sessions, at the end of
which the scout was removed in order to observe what her team might do. Often the
foragers proceeded to the exact spot in the maze where the food had been. Elaborate
precautions were taken to prevent the foraging team using odour clues. Discussion now
centres on whether the route through the maze is communicated as a 'left-right' sequence
of turns or as a ‘compass bearing and distance’ message.

During the course of this exhaustive study, Reznikova has grown so attached to
her laboratory ants that she feels she knows them as individuals - even without the
paint spots used to mark them. It’s no surprise that Edward Wilson, in his essay, ‘In
the company of ants’, advises readers who ask what to do with the ants in their kitchen
to: ‘Watch where you step. Be careful of little lives.'

* aphids: small insects of a different species from ants

Questions 1-6

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?

In boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
1..................... Ants use the same channels of communication as humans do.

2..................... City life is one factor that encourages the development of intelligence.

3..................... Ants can build large cities more quickly than humans do.

4..................... Some ants can find their way by making calculations based on distance
and position.

5..................... In one experiment, foraging teams were able to use their sense of smell to
find food.

6..................... The essay, ‘In the company of ants’, explores ant communication.


Questions 7-13

Complete the summary using the list of words, A-O, below.

Write the correct letter, A-O, in boxes 7-13 on your answer sheet.


Ants as farmers


Ants have sophisticated methods of farming, including herding livestock and growing
crops, which are in many ways similar to those used in human agriculture. The
ants cultivate a large number of different species of edible fungi which convert
7..................... into a form which they can digest. They use their own
natural 8..................... as weed-killers and also use unwanted materials as
9...................... Genetic analysis shows they constantly upgrade these fungi by
developing new species and by 10..................... species with neighbouring ant colonies.
In fact, the farming methods of ants could be said to be more advanced than human
agribusiness, since they use 11..................... methods, they do not affect the

12..................... and do not waste 13......................


Aaphids Bagricultural Ccellulose Dexchanging
E energy Ffertilizers Gfood Hfungi

I growing J interbreeding Knatural Lother species
Msecretions Nsustainable Oenvironment

Solution:

1. FALSE 8. M
2. TRUE 9. F

3. NOT GIVEN 10. D
4. TRUE 11. N

5. FALSE 12. O
6. NOT GIVEN 13. E

7. C
