TITLE: Ants Could Teach Ants
INDEX: 33
============================================================

Ants Could Teach Ants

The ants are tiny and usually nest between rocks in the south coast of England.
Transformed into research subjects at the University of Bristol, they raced along a tabletop
foraging for food -and then, remarkably, returned to guide others. Time and again, followers
trailed behind leaders, darting this way and that along the route, presumably to memorize
land- marks. Once a follower got its bearings, it tapped the leader with its antennae,
prompting the lesson to literally proceed to the next step. The ants were only looking for
food but the researchers said the careful way the leaders led followers -thereby turning
them into leaders in their own right -marked the Temnothorax albipennis ant as the very
first example of a non-human animal exhibiting teaching behavior.

"Tandem running is an example of teaching, to our knowledge the first in a non-human
animal, that involves bidirectional feedback between teacher and pupil," remarks Nigel
Franks, professor of animal behavior and ecology, whose paper on the ant educators was
published last week in the journal Nature.

No sooner was the paper published, of course, than another educator questioned it. Marc
Hauser, a psychologist and biologist and one of the scientists who came up with the
definition of teaching, said it was unclear whether the ants had learned a new skill or
merely acquired new information.

Later, Franks took a further study and found that there were even races between leaders.
With the guidance of leaders, ants could find food faster. But the help comes at a cost for
the leader, who normally would have reached the food about four times faster if not
hampered by a follower. This means the hypothesis that the leaders deliberately slowed
down in order to pass the skills on to the followers seems potentially valid. His ideas were
advocated by the students who carried out the video project with him.
Opposing views still arose, however. Hauser noted that mere communication of information
is commonplace in the animal world. Consider a species, for example, that uses alarm calls
to warn fellow members about the presence of a predator. Sounding the alarm can be
costly, because the animal may draw the attention of the predator to itself. But it allows
others to flee to safety. “Would you call this teaching?” wrote Hauser. “The caller incurs a
cost. The naive animals gain a benefit and new knowledge that better enables them to
learn about the predator’s location than if the caller had not called. This happens
throughout the animal kingdom, but we don’t call it teaching, even though it is clearly
transfer of information.”

Tim Caro, a zoologist, presented two cases of animal communication. He found that
cheetah mothers that take their cubs along on hunts gradually allow their cubs to do more
of the hunting -going, for example, from killing a gazelle and allowing young cubs to eat to
merely tripping the gazelle and letting the cubs finish it off. At one level, such behavior
might be called teaching -except the mother was not really teaching the cubs to hunt but
merely facilitating various stages of learning. In another instance, birds watching other birds
using a stick to locate food such as insects and so on, are observed to do the same thing
themselves while finding food later.

Psychologists study animal behavior in part to understand the evolutionary roots of human
behavior, Hauser said. The challenge in understanding whether other animals truly teach
one another, he added, is that human teaching involves a “theory of mind” -teachers are
aware that students don’t know something. He questioned whether Franks’s leader ants
really knew that the follower ants were ignorant. Could they simply have been following an
instinctive rule to proceed when the followers tapped them on the legs or abdomen? And
did leaders that led the way to food -only to find that it had been removed by the
experimenter -incur the wrath of followers? That, Hauser said, would suggest that the
follower ant actually knew the leader was more knowledgeable and not merely following an
instinctive routine itself.

The controversy went on, and for a good reason. The occurrence of teaching in ants, if
proven to be true, indicates that teaching can evolve in animals with tiny brains. It is
probably the value of information in social animals that determines when teaching will
evolve rather than the constraints of brain size.

Bennett Galef Jr., a psychologist who studies animal behavior and social learning at
McMaster University in Canada, maintained that ants were unlikely to have a “theory of
mind” -meaning that leader and followers may well have been following instinctive routines
that were not based on an understanding of what was happening in another ant’s brain. He
warned that scientists may be barking up the wrong tree when they look not only for
examples of humanlike behavior among other animals but humanlike thinking that
underlies such behavior. Animals may behave in ways similar to humans without a similar
cognitive system, he said, so the behavior is not necessarily a good guide into how humans
came to think the way they do.

Questions 1-5

Look at the following statements (Questions 1-5) and the list of people in the box below.

Match each statement with the correct person, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter, A, B, C or D, in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.

1..................... Animals could use objects to locate food.
2..................... Ants show two-way, interactive teaching behaviors.

3..................... It is risky to say ants can teach other ants like human beings do.

4..................... Ant leadership makes finding food faster.

5..................... Communication between ants is not entirely teaching.


List of People

A Nigel Franks

B Marc Hauser

C Tim Caro

D Bennett Galef Jr.


Questions 6-9

Choose FOUR letters, A-H

Write your answers in boxes 6-9 on your answer sheet.

Which FOUR of the following behaviors of animals are mentioned in the passage?


Atouch each other with antenna
Balert others when there is danger

Cescape from predators
Dprotect the young

Ehunt food for the young
F fight with each other

Guse tools like twigs
Hfeed on a variety of foods

Solution:

8. A,B,E,G IN ANY
1. C
ORDER
9. A,B,E,G IN ANY
2. A
ORDER
3. D 10. NO
4. A 11. NOT GIVEN
5. B 12. NOT GIVEN

6. A,B,E,G IN ANY
13. YES
ORDER
7. A,B,E,G IN ANY
ORDER
