TITLE: Architecture - Reaching for the Sky
INDEX: 36
============================================================

Architecture - Reaching for the Sky

Architecture is the art and science of designing buildings and structures. A building reflects
the scientific and technological achievements of the age as well as the ideas and
aspirations of the designer and client. The appearance of individual buildings, however, is
often controversial.

The use of an architectural style cannot be said to start or finish on a specific date. Neither
is it possible to say exactly what characterises a particular movement. But the origins of
what is now generally known as modern architecture can be traced back to the social and
technological changes of the 18th and 19th centuries.

Instead of using timber, stone and traditional building techniques, architects began to
explore ways of creating buildings by using the latest technology and materials such as
steel, glass and concrete strengthened steel bars, known as reinforced concrete.
Technological advances also helped bring about the decline of rural industries and an
increase in urban populations as people moved to the towns to work in the new factories.
Such rapid and uncontrolled growth helped to turn parts of cities into slums.

By the 1920s architects throughout Europe were reacting against the conditions created by
industrialisation. A new style of architecture emerged to reflect more idealistic notions for
the future. It was made possible by new materials and construction techniques and was
known as Modernism.

By the 1930s many buildings emerging from this movement were designed in the
International Style. This was largely characterised by the bold use of new materials and
simple, geometric forms, often with white walls supported by stilt-like pillars. These were
stripped of unnecessary decoration that would detract from their primary purpose — to be
used or lived in.

Walter Gropius, Charles Jeanneret (better known as Le Corbusier) and Ludwig Mies van
der Rohe were among the most influential of the many architects who contributed to the
development of Modernism in the first half of the century. But the economic depression of
the 1930s and the second world war (1939-45) prevented their ideas from being widely
realised until the economic conditions improved and war-torn cities had to be rebuilt. By the
1950s, the International Style had developed into a universal approach to building, which
standardised the appearance of new buildings in cities across the world.

Unfortunately, this Modernist interest in geometric simplicity and function became exploited
for profit. The rediscovery of quick-and-easy-to-handle reinforced concrete and an
improved ability to prefabricate building sections meant that builders could meet the
budgets of commissioning authorities and handle a renewed demand for development
quickly and cheaply. But this led to many badly designed buildings, which discredited the
original aims of Modernism.

Influenced by Le Corbusier’s ideas on town planning, every large British city built multi-
storey housing estates in the 1960s. Mass- produced, low-cost high-rises seemed to offer a
solution to the problem of housing a growing inner-city population. But far from meeting
human needs, the new estates often proved to be windswept deserts lacking essential
social facilities and services. Many of these buildings were poorly designed and
constructed and have since been demolished.

By the 1970s, a new respect for the place of buildings within the existing townscape arose.
Preserving historic buildings or keeping only their facades (or fronts) grew common.
Architects also began to make more use of building styles and materials that were
traditional to the area. The architectural style usually referred to as High Tech was also
emerging. It celebrated scientific and engineering achievements by openly parading the
sophisticated techniques used in construction. Such buildings are commonly made of metal
and glass; examples are Stansted airport and the Lloyd’s building in London.
Disillusionment at the failure of many of the poor imitations of Modernist architecture led to
interest in various styles and ideas from the past and present. By the 1980s the
coexistence of different styles of architecture in the same building became known as Post
Modern. Other architects looked back to the classical tradition. The trend in architecture
now favours smaller scale building design that reflects a growing public awareness of
environmental issues such as energy efficiency. Like the Modernists, people today
recognise that a well designed environment improves the quality of life but is not
necessarily achieved by adopting one well defined style of architecture.

Twentieth century architecture will mainly be remembered for its tall buildings. They have
been made possible by the development of light steel frames and safe passenger lifts.
They originated in the US over a century ago to help meet the demand for more
economical use of land. As construction techniques improved, the skyscraper became a
reality.

Ruth Coleman

Questions 1-7

Complete the table below using information from Reading Passage .

Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet.

BUILDING
PERIOD STYLE OF PERIOD CHARACTERISTICS
MATERIALS
Example
Before 18 th
1.....................
century
traditional
steel, glass and
1920s introduction of 2..................... exploration of latest technology
concrete
1930s - 1950s 3..................... geometric forms
pre-fabricated
1960s decline of Modernism 4.....................
sections
5.....................
1970s end of Modernist era traditional materials
of historic buildings
beginning of sophisticated techniques
1970s metal and glass
6..................... era paraded
1980s Post-Modernism 7.....................


Questions 8-12

Reading Passage describes a number of cause and effect relationships. Match each
Cause (8-12) in List A, with its Effect (A-H) in List B.

Write your answers (A-H) in boxes 9-12 on your answer sheet.
NB There are more effects in List B than you will need, so you will not use all of
them. You may use any effect more than once if you wish.
List A CAUSES List B EFFECTS

A The quality of life is improved.
8..................... A rapid movement of people from rural
areas to cities is triggered by technological advance.
B Architecture reflects the age.
9..................... Buildings become simple and functional.
C A number of these have been knocked down.
10..................... An economic depression and the second
D Light steel frames and lifts are developed.
world war hit Europe.
E Historical buildings are preserved.
11..................... Multi-storey housing estates are built
F All decoration is removed.
according to contemporary ideas on town planning.
G Parts of cities become slums.
12..................... Less land must be used for building.
H Modernist ideas cannot be put into practice
until the second half of the 20th century.

Solution:

7. co-existence
of
styles//different
1. timber and stone
styles
together//styles
mixed
2. Modernism 8. G
3. International style 9. F

4. badly designed
buildings//multi-storey
housing//mass- 10. H
produced, low-cost
high-rises

5. preservation 11. C
6. High-Tech 12. D
