TITLE: A Remarkable Beetle
INDEX: 37
============================================================

A Remarkable Beetle


More than 4,000 species of these remarkable creatures have evolved and adapted to the
world’s different climates and the dung of its many animals. Australia’s native dung beetles
are scrub and woodland dwellers, specialising in coarse marsupial droppings and avoiding
the soft cattle dung in which bush flies and buffalo flies breed.Some of the most remarkable
beetles are the dung beetles, which spend almost their whole lives eating and breeding in
dung’.
In the early 1960s George Bornemissza, then a scientist at the Australian Government’s
premier research organisation, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation (CSIRO), suggested that dung beetles should be introduced to Australia to
control dung-breeding flies. Between 1968 and 1982, the CSIRO imported insects from
about 50 different species of dung beetle, from Asia, Europe and Africa, aiming to match
them to different climatic zones in Australia. Of the 26 species that are known to have
become successfully integrated into the local environment, only one, an African species
released in northern Australia, has reached its natural boundary.

Introducing dung beetles into a pasture is a simple process: approximately 1,500 beetles
are released, a handful at a time, into fresh cow pats2 in the cow pasture.

The beetles immediately disappear beneath the pats digging and tunnelling and, if they
successfully adapt to their new environment, soon become a permanent, self sustaining
part of the local ecology. In time they multiply and within three or four years the benefits to
the pasture are obvious.

Dung beetles work from the inside of the pat so they are sheltered from predators such as
birds and foxes. Most species burrow into the soil and bury dung in tunnels directly
underneath the pats, which are hollowed out from within. Some large species originating
from France excavate tunnels to a depth of approximately 30 cm below the dung pat.
These beetles make sausage-shaped brood chambers along the tunnels. The shallowest
tunnels belong to a much smaller Spanish species that buries dung in chambers that hang
like fruit from the branches of a pear tree. South African beetles dig narrow tunnels of
approximately 20 cm below the surface of the pat. Some surface-dwelling beetles,
including a South African species, cut perfectly-shaped balls from the pat, which are rolled
away and attached to the bases of plants.

For maximum dung burial in spring, summer and autumn, farmers require a variety of
species with overlapping periods of activity. In the cooler environments of the state of
Victoria, the large French species (2.5 cms long) is matched with smaller (half this size),
temperate-climate Spanish species. The former are slow to recover from the winter cold
and produce only one or two generations of offspring from late spring until autumn. The
latter, which multiply rapidly in early spring, produce two to five generations annually. The
South African ball-rolling species, being a subtropical beetle, prefers the climate of northern
and coastal New South Wales where it commonly works with the South African tunnelling
species. In warmer climates, many species are active for longer periods of the year.

Dung beetles were initially introduced in the late 1960s with a view to controlling buffalo
flies by removing the dung within a day or two and so preventing flies from breeding.
However, other benefits have become evident. Once the beetle larvae have finished
pupation, the residue is a first-rate source of fertiliser. The tunnels abandoned by the
beetles provide excellent aeration and water channels for root systems. In addition, when
the new generation of beetles has left the nest the abandoned burrows are an attractive
habitat for soil-enriching earthworms. The digested dung in these burrows is an excellent
food supply for the earthworms, which decompose it further to provide essential soil
nutrients. If it were not for the dung beetle, chemical fertiliser and dung would be washed
by rain into streams and rivers before it could be absorbed into the hard earth, polluting
water courses and causing blooms of blue-green algae. Without the beetles to dispose of
the dung, cow pats would litter pastures making grass inedible to cattle and depriving the
soil of sunlight. Australia’s 30 million cattle each produce 10-12 cow pats a day. This
amounts to 1.7 billion tonnes a year, enough to smother about 110,000 sq km of pasture,
half the area of Victoria.

Dung beetles have become an integral part of the successful management of dairy farms in
Australia over the past few decades. A number of species are available from the CSIRO or
through a small number of private breeders, most of whom were entomologists with the

CSIRO’s dung beetle unit who have taken their specialised knowledge of the insect and
opened small businesses in direct competition with their former employer.


Glossary

1. dung: the droppings or excreta of animals

2. cow pats: droppings of cows

Questions 1-5

Do the following statements reflect the claims of the writer in Reading Passage 1?

In boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet write

YES if the statement reflects the claims of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this


1..................... Bush flies are easier to control than buffalo flies.

2..................... Four thousand species of dung beetle were initially brought to Australia by
the CSIRO.

3..................... Dung beetles were brought to Australia by the CSIRO over a fourteen-year
period.

4..................... At least twenty-six of the introduced species have become established in
Australia.

5..................... The dung beetles cause an immediate improvement to the quality of a cow
pasture.


Questions 6-8

Label the tunnels on the diagram below.

Choose your labels from the box below the diagram.

Write your answers in boxes 6-8 on your answer sheet.


6.....................

7.....................

8.....................


Dung Beetle Types

French Spanish

Mediterranean South African


Australian native South African ball roller

Questions 9-13

Complete the table below.

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS OR A NUMBER from Reading Passage 1 for
each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 9—13 on your answer sheet.


Number of
Preferred Complementary Start of generations

Species Size climate species active period per year

French 2.5 cm cool Spanish late spring 1-2

Spanish 1.25 cm 9..................... 10.....................11.....................
South African ball roller 12.....................13.....................

Solution:

1.
NOT
8. Spanish
GIVE
N
2. NO 9. temperate
3.
10. early spring NOT spring
YES
4.
11. 2-5 // two to five
YES
5. NO 12. sub-tropical
6.
13. South African
South
tunneling/tunnelling/tunneler/tunnel
Africa
ler
n
7.
Frenc
h
