TITLE: A spark, a flint: How fire leapt to life
INDEX: 43
============================================================

A spark, a flint: How fire leapt to life


The control of fire was the first and perhaps greatest of humanity’s steps towards a
life-enhancing technology.

To early man, fire was a divine gift randomly delivered in the form of lightning, forest fire or
burning lava. Unable to make flame for themselves, the earliest peoples probably stored
fire by keeping slow burning logs alight or by carrying charcoal in pots.

How and where man learnt how to produce flame at will is unknown. It was probably a
secondary invention, accidentally made during tool-making operations with wood or stone.
Studies of primitive societies suggest that the earliest method of making fire was through
friction. European peasants would insert a wooden drill in a round hole and rotate it briskly
between their palms This process could be speeded up by wrapping a cord around the drill
and pulling on each end.

The Ancient Greeks used lenses or concave mirrors to concentrate the sun’s rays and
burning glasses were also used by Mexican Aztecs and the Chinese.

Percussion methods of fire-lighting date back to Paleolithic times, when some Stone Age
tool-makers discovered that chipping flints produced sparks. The technique became more
efficient after the discovery of iron, about 5000 years ago In Arctic North America, the
Eskimos produced a slow-burning spark by striking quartz against iron pyrites, a compound
that contains sulphur. The Chinese lit their fires by striking porcelain with bamboo. In
Europe, the combination of steel, flint and tinder remained the main method of fire-lighting
until the mid 19th century.

Fire-lighting was revolutionised by the discovery of phosphorus, isolated in 1669 by a
German alchemist trying to transmute silver into gold. Impressed by the element’s
combustibility, several 17th century chemists used it to manufacture fire-lighting devices,
but the results were dangerously inflammable. With phosphorus costing the equivalent of
several hundred pounds per ounce, the first matches were expensive.

The quest for a practical match really began after 1781 when a group of French chemists
came up with the Phosphoric Candle or Ethereal Match, a sealed glass tube containing a
twist of paper tipped with phosphorus. When the tube was broken, air rushed in, causing
the phosphorus to self-combust. An even more hazardous device, popular in America, was
the Instantaneous Light Box — a bottle filled with sulphuric acid into which splints treated
with chemicals were dipped.

The first matches resembling those used today were made in 1827 by John Walker, an
English pharmacist who borrowed the formula from a military rocket-maker called
Congreve. Costing a shilling a box, Congreves were splints coated with sulphur and tipped
with potassium chlorate. To light them, the user drew them quickly through folded glass
paper.

Walker never patented his invention, and three years later it was copied by a Samuel
Jones, who marketed his product as Lucifers. About the same time, a French chemistry
student called Charles Sauria produced the first “strike-anywhere” match by substituting
white phosphorus for the potassium chlorate in the Walker formula. However, since white
phosphorus is a deadly poison, from 1845 match-makers exposed to its fumes succumbed
to necrosis, a disease that eats away jaw-bones. It wasn’t until 1906 that the substance
was eventually banned.

That was 62 years after a Swedish chemist called Pasch had discovered non-toxic red or
amorphous phosphorus, a development exploited commercially by Pasch’s compatriot J E
Lundstrom in 1885. Lundstrom’s safety matches were safe because the red phosphorus
was non-toxic; it was painted on to the striking surface instead of the match tip, which
contained potassium chlorate with a relatively high ignition temperature of 182 degrees
centigrade.

America lagged behind Europe in match technology and safety standards. It wasn’t until
1900 that the Diamond Match Company bought a French patent for safety matches — but
the formula did not work properly in the different climatic conditions prevailing in America
and it was another 11 years before scientists finally adapted the French patent for the US.

The Americans, however, can claim several “firsts” in match technology and marketing. In
1892 the Diamond Match Company pioneered book matches. The innovation didn’t catch
on until after 1896, when a brewery had the novel idea of advertising its product in match
books. Today book matches are the most widely used type in the US, with 90 percent
handed out free by hotels, restaurants and others.

Other American innovations include an anti-after-glow solution to prevent the match from
smouldering after it has been blown out; and the waterproof match, which lights after eight
hours in water.

Questions 1-8

Complete the summary below. Choose your answers from the box at the bottom of the
page and write them in boxes 1 8 on your answer sheet.

NB There are more words than spaces so you will not use them all You may use any
of the words more than once.

EARLY FIRE-LIGHTING METHODS


Primitive societies saw fire as a ... (Example) ... gift. Answer: heavenly


They tried to 1..................... burning logs or charcoal 2..................... that they could create
fire themselves.

It is suspected that the first man-made flames were produced by 3.....................

The very first fire-lighting methods involved the creation of 4..................... by, for example,
rapidly 5..................... a wooden stick in a round hole.

The use of 6..................... or persistent chipping was also widespread in Europe and
among other peoples such as the Chinese and 7..................... .

European practice of this method continued until the 1850s 8..................... the discovery of
phosphorus some years earlier.
List of Words

Mexicans random rotating
despite preserve realising
sunlight lacking heavenly
percussion chance friction
unaware without make
heating Eskimos surprised
until smoke


Questions 9-15

Look at the following notes that have been made about the matches described in Reading
Passage. Decide which type of match (A-H) corresponds with each description and write
your answers in boxes 9-15 on your answer sheet.
NB There are more matches than descriptions so you will not use them all.

You may use any match more than once.
Example Answer
could be lit after soaking in water H


Types of Matches

A the Ethereal Match

B the Instantaneous Lightbox

C Congreves

D Lucifers
E the first strike-anywhere match

F Lundstrom’s safety match

G book matches

H waterproof matches

NOTES

9..................... made using a less poisonous type of phosphorus

10..................... identical to a previous type of match
11..................... caused a deadly illness

12..................... first to look like modern matches

13..................... first matches used for advertising
14..................... relied on an airtight glass container

15..................... made with the help of an army design

Solution:

1. preserve 9. F
2. unaware 10. D

3. chance 11. E
4. friction 12. C

5. rotating 13. G
6. percussion 14. A

7. Eskimos 15. C

8. despite
