TITLE: Australian parrots and their adaptation to habitat
INDEX: 51
============================================================

Australian parrots and their adaptation to habitat
change

A. Parrots are found across the tropic and in all southern hemisphere continents except
Antarctica, but nowhere do the display such a richness of diversity and form as in Australia.
One- sixth of the world’s 345 parrot species are found there, and Australia has long been
renowned for the number and variety of its parrots.

B. In the 16th century, the German cartographer Mercator made a world map that included
a place, somewhere near present-day Australia, that he named Terra Psittacorum – the
Land of Parrots – and the first European settlers in Australia often referred to the country
as Parrot Land. In 1865, the celebrated British naturalist and wildlife artist John Gould said:
“No group of birds gives Australia so tropical and benign an air as the numerous species of
this great family by which it is tenanted.

C. Parrots are descendants of an ancient line. Due to their great diversity, and since most
species inhabit Africa, Australia and South America, it seems almost certain that parrots
originated millions of years ago on the ancient southern continent of Gondwana, before it
broke up into the separate southern hemisphere continents we know today. Much of
Gondwana comprised vast rainforests intersected by huge slow-flowing rivers and
expansive lakes, but by eight million years ago, great changes were underway. The center
of the continent of Australia had begun to dry out, and the rainforests that once covered it
gradually contracted to the continental margins, where, to a limited extent, they still exist
today.

D. The creatures that remained in those shrinking rainforests had to adapt to the drier
conditions or face extinction. Reacting to these desperate circumstances, the parrot family,
typically found in jungles in other parts of the world, has populated some of Australia’s
harshest environments. The parrots spread from ancestral forests through eucalypt
woodlands to colonies the central deserts of Australia, and as a consequence they
diversified into a wide range of species with adaptations that reflect the many changes
animals and plants had to make to survive in these areas.
E. These evolutionary pressures helped mould keratin, the substance from which breaks
are made into a range of tools capable of gathering the new food types favored by various
species of parrot. The size of a parrot’s short, blunt beak and the length of that beak’s do
curved upper section are related to the type of food each species eats. Some have
comparatively long beaks that are perfect for extracting seeds from fruit; others have
broader and stronger beaks that are designed for cracking hard seeds.

F. Differently shaped beaks are not the only adaptations that have been made during the
developing relationship between parrots and their food plants. Like all of Australia’s many
honey eating birds, the rainbow-coloured lorikeets and the flowers on which they feed have
long coevolved with features such as the shape and colour of the flowers adapted to the
bird’s particular needs, and physical a example, red is the most I attractive colour to birds,
and thus flowers which depend on birds for pollination are more often red, and lorikeets’ to
gues have bristles which help them to collect as much pollen as possible.
G. Today, most of Australia’s parrots inhabit woodland and open forest, and their numbers
decline towards both deserts and wetter areas. The majority are nomadic to some degree,
moving around to take advantage of feeding and breeding places. Two of the dry country
parrots, the pink and grey galah and the pink, white and yellow corella have expanded their
ranges in recent years. They are among the species that have adapted well to the changes
brought about by European settlement forest telling created grasslands where galahs and
corellas thrive.
H. But other parrot species did not fare so well when their environments were altered. The
clearing of large areas of rainforest is probably responsible for the disappearance of the
double-eyed fig parrot, and numbers of ground parrots declined when a great part of their
habitat was destroyed by the draining of coastal swamps. Even some parrot species that
benefited from forest clearing at first are now comforted by a shortage of nesting sites due
to further man-made changes.

I. New conditions also sometimes favour an incoming species over one that originally
inhabited the area. For example, after farmers cleared large areas of forest on Kangaroo
Island off the coast of South Australia, the island was colonised by galahs. They were soon
going down holes and destroying black cockatoo eggs in order to take the hole for their
own use. Their success precipitated a partial collapse in the black cockatoo population
when the later lost the struggle for scarce nesting hollows.

J. There may be no final answer to ensuring an equitable balance between parrot species.
Nest box programmers help ease the shortage of nesting sites in some places, but there
are not enough, they are expensive and they are not an adequate substitute by large, old
trees, such as the habitat they represent and nectar, pollen and seeds they provide.
Competition between parrots for nest sites is a result of the changes we humans have
made to the Earth. We are the most widespread and dangerous competitors that parrots
have ever had to face, but we also have the knowledge and skill to maintain the
wonderfully rich diversity of Australia’s parrots. All we need is the wild to do so.

Questions 1-6

Reading Passage has ten paragraphs A-J

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter, A-J in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet

1..................... An example of how one parrot species may survive at the expense of
another

2..................... A description of how plants may adapt to attract birds

3..................... Example of two parrot species which benefited from changes to the
environment

4..................... How the varied Australian landscape resulted in a great variety of
parrot species

5..................... A reason why most parrot species are native to the southern
hemisphere
6..................... An example of a parrot species which did not survive changes to its
habitat


Questions 7-9

Choose the correct letter A, B, c, or D

Write the correct letter in boxes 7-9 on your answer sheet

7. The writer believes that most parrot species
A Move from Africa and South America to Australia

B Had ancestors in either Africa, Australia or South America

C Had ancestors in a continent which later split up

D Came from a continent now covered by water

8. What does the Writer say about parrot's beak?

A They are longer than those of other birds

B They are made of a unique material

C They are used more efficiently than those of other species
D They are specially adapted to suit the diet

9. Which of the following is NOT mentioned by the writer as a disadvantage of nesting
boxes?

A They cost too much
B They need to be maintained

C They provide only shelter, not food

D They are too few of them


Questions 10-13

Complete the summary below

Choose NO MORE THANH TWO WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER from the passage for
each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet

Parrots in Australia

There are 345 varieties of parrot in existence and, of these, 10..................... live in
Australia. As early as the 11....................., the mapmaker 12..................... recognized that
parrots lived in that part of the world. 13..................... , the famous painter of animals and
birds, commented on the size and beauty of the Australian parrot family.

Solution:

1. I 8. D
2. F 9. B

3. G 10. one-sixth
4. D 11. 16th century

5. C 12. Mercator
6. H 13. John Gould

7. C
