TITLE: BAKELITE - The birth of modem plastics
INDEX: 58
============================================================

BAKELITE - The birth of modem plastics

In 1907, Leo Hendrick Baekeland, a Belgian scientist working in New York, discovered and
patented a revolutionary new synthetic material. His invention, which he named 'Bakelite',
was of enormous technological importance, and effectively launched the modern plastics
industry.

The term 'plastic' comes from the Greek plassein, meaning 'to mould' Some plastics are
derived from natural sources, some are semi-synthetic (the result of chemical action on a
natural substance), and some are entirely synthetic, that is, chemically engineered from the
constituents of coal or oil. Some are 'thermoplastic', which means that, like candlewax, they
melt when heated and can then be reshaped. Others are 'thermosetting': like eggs, they
cannot revert to their original viscous state, and their shape is thus fixed for ever Bakelite
had the distinction of being the first totally synthetic thermosetting plastic.

The history of today's plastics begins with the discovery of a series of semi-synthetic
thermoplastic materials in the mid-nineteenth century. The impetus behind the
development of these early plastics was generated by a number of factors - immense
technological progress in the domain of chemistry, coupled with wider cultural changes,
and the pragmatic need to find acceptable substitutes for dwindling supplies of 'luxury'
materials such as tortoiseshell and ivory.

Baekeland's interest in plastics began in 1885 when, as a young chemistry student in
Belgium, he embarked on research into phenolic resins, the group of sticky substances
produced when phenol (carbolic acid) combines with an aldehyde (a volatile fluid similar to
alcohol). He soon abandoned the subject, however, only returning to it some years later. 8y

1905 he was a wealthy New Yorker, having recently made his fortune with the invention of
a new photographic paper. While Baekeland had been busily amassing dollars, some
advances had been made in the development of plastics. The years 1899 and 1900 had
seen the patenting of the first semi-synthetic thermosetting material that could be
manufactured on an industrial scale. In purely scientific terms, Baekeland's major
contribution to the field is not so much the actual discovery of the material to which he gave
his name, but rather the method by which a reaction between phenol and formaldehyde
could be controlled, thus making possible its preparation on a commercial basis. On 13
July 1907, Baekeland took out his famous patent describing this preparation, the essential
features of which are still in use today.

The original patent outlined a three-stage process, in which phenol and formaldehyde (from
wood or coal) were initially combined under vacuum inside a large egg-shaped kettle. The
result was a resin known as Novalak, which became soluble and malleable when heated.
The resin was allowed to cool in shallow trays until it hardened, and then broken up and
ground into powder. Other substances were then introduced: including fillers, such as
woodflour, asbestos or cotton, which increase strength and moisture resistance, catalysts
(substances to speed up the reaction between two chemicals without joining to either) and
hexa, a compound of ammonia and formaldehyde which supplied the additional
formaldehyde necessary to form a thermosetting resin. This resin was then left to cool and
harden, and ground up a second time. The resulting granular powder was raw Bakelite,
ready to be made into a vast range of manufactured objects. In the last stage, the heated

Bakelite was poured into a hollow mould of the required shape and subjected to extreme
heat and pressure, thereby 'setting' its form for life.

The design of Bakelite objects, everything from earrings to television sets, was governed to
a large extent by the technical requirements of the moulding process. The object could not
be designed so that it was locked into the mould and therefore difficult to extract. A
common general rule was that objects should taper towards the deepest part of the mould,
and if necessary the product was moulded in separate pieces. Moulds had to be carefully
designed so that the molten Bakelite would flow evenly and completely into the mould.

Sharp corners proved impractical and were thus avoided, giving rise to the smooth,
'streamlined' style popular in the 1930s. The thickness of the walls of the mould was also
crucial’ thick walls took longer to cool and harden, a factor which had to be considered by
the designer in order to make the most efficient use of machines.

Baekeland's invention, although treated with disdain in its early years, went on to enjoy an
unparalleled popularity which lasted throughout the first half of the twentieth century. It
became the wonder product of the new world of industrial expansion - 'the material of a
thousand uses'. Being both non-porous and heat-resistant, Bakelite kitchen goods were
promoted as being germ-free and sterilisable. Electrical manufacturers seized on its
insulating properties, and consumers everywhere relished its dazzling array of shades,
delighted that they were now, at last, no longer restricted to the wood tones and drab
browns of the preplastic era. It then fell from favour again during the 1950s, and was
despised and destroyed in vast quantities. Recently, however, it has been experiencing
something of a renaissance, with renewed demand for original Bakelite objects in the
collectors' marketplace, and museums, societies and dedicated individuals once again
appreciating the style and originality of this innovative material.

Questions 1-3

Complete the summary.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer. Write your answers in
boxes 1-3 on your answer sheet.


Some plastics behave in a similar way to 1...................... In that they melt under heat
and can be moulded into new forms. Bakelite was unique because it was the first
material to be both entirely 2..................... in origin, and thermosetting.

There were several reasons for the research into plastics in the nineteenth century,
among them the great advances that had been made in the field of 3..................... and
the search for alternatives to natural resources like ivory.


Questions 4-8

Complete the flow-chart.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer

Write your answers in boxes 4-8 on your answer sheet.


4.....................

5.....................


6.....................


7.....................

8.....................


Questions 9-10

Choose TWO letters A-E.

Write your answers in boxes 9-10 on your answer sheet.
NB Your answers may be given in either order.


Which TWO of the following factors influencing the design of Bakelite objects are
mentioned in the text?

A the function which the object would serve

B the ease with which the resin could fill the mould
C the facility with which the object could be removed from the mould

D the limitations of the materials used to manufacture the mould

E the fashionable styles of the period


Questions 11-13

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?

In boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this


11..................... Modern-day plastic preparation is based on the same principles as that
patented in 1907.

12..................... Bakelite was immediately welcomed as a practical and versatile material.

13..................... Bakelite was only available in a limited range of colours.

Solution:

1. candlewax 8. pressure
9. B, C IN EITHER
2. synthetic
ORDER
10. B, C IN
3. chemistry
EITHER ORDER
4. Novalak 11. TRUE
5. fillers 12. FALSE

6. hexa 13. FALSE
7. raw
