TITLE: Being Left-handed in a Right-handed World
INDEX: 61
============================================================

Being Left-handed in a Right-handed World

The world is designed for right-handed people. Why does a tenth of the population
prefer the left?


A The probability that two right-handed people would have a left-handed child is only about
9.5 percent. The chance rises to 19.5 percent if one parent is a lefty and 26 percent if both
parents are left-handed. The preference, however, could also stem from an infant’s
imitation of his parents. To test genetic influence, starting in the 1970s British biologist
Marian Annett of the University of Leicester hypothesized that no single gene determines
handedness. Rather, during fetal development, a certain molecular factor helps to
strengthen the brain’s left hemisphere, which increases the probability that the right hand
will be dominant, because the left side of the brain controls the right side of the body, and
vice versa. Among the minority of people who lack this factor, handedness develops
entirely by chance. Research conducted on twins complicates the theory, however. One in
fivesets of identical twins involves one right-handed and one left-handed person, despite
the fact that their genetic material is the same. Genes, therefore, are not solely responsible
for handedness.


B Genetic theory is also undermined by results from Peter Hepper and his team at Queen’s
University in Belfast, Ireland. In 2004 the psychologists used ultrasound to show that by the

15th week of pregnancy, fetuses already have a preference as to which thumb they suck.
In most cases, the preference continued after birth. At 15 weeks, though, the brain does
not yet have control over the body’s limbs. Hepper speculates that fetuses tend to prefer
whichever side of the body is developing quicker and that their movements, in turn,
influence the brain’s development. Whether this early preference is temporary or holds up
throughout development and infancy is unknown. Genetic predetermination is also
contradicted by the widespread observation that children do not settle on either their right
or left hand until they are two or three years old.


C But even if these correlations were true, they did not explain what actually causes left-
handedness. Furthermore, specialization on either side of the body is common among
animals. Cats will favor one paw over another when fishing toys out from under the couch.

Horses stomp more frequently with one hoof than the other. Certain crabs motion
predominantly with the left or right claw. In evolutionary terms, focusing power and dexterity
in one limb is more efficient than having to train two, four or even eight limbs equally. Yet
for most animals, the preference for one side or the other is seemingly random. The
overwhelming dominance of the right hand is associated only with humans. That fact
directs attention toward the brain’s two hemispheres and perhaps toward language.


D Interest in hemispheres dates back to at least 1836. That year, at a medical conference,
French physician Marc Dax reported on an unusual commonality among his patients.
During his many years as a country doctor, Dax had encountered more than 40 men and
women for whom speech was difficult, the result of some kind of brain damage. What was
unique was that every individual suffered damage to the left side of the brain. At the
conference, Dax elaborated on his theory, stating that each half of the brain was
responsible for certain functions and that the left hemisphere controlled speech. Other
experts showed little interest in the Frenchman’s ideas. Over time, however, scientists
found more and more evidence of peopleexperiencing speech difficulties following injury to
the left brain. Patients with damage to the right hemisphere most often displayed
disruptions in perception or concentration. Major advancements in understanding the
brain’s asymmetry were made in the 1960s as a result of so-called split-brain surgery,
developed to help patients with epilepsy. During this operation, doctors severed the corpus
callosum—the nerve bundle that connects the two hemispheres. The surgical cut also
stopped almost all normal communication between the two hemispheres, which offered
researchers the opportunity to investigate each side’s activity.


E In 1949 neurosurgeon Juhn Wada devised the first test to provide access to the brain’s
functional organization of language. By injecting an anesthetic into the right or left carotid
artery, Wada temporarily paralyzed one side of a healthy brain, enabling him to more
closely study the other side’s capabilities. Based on this approach, Brenda Milner and the
late Theodore Rasmussen of the Montreal Neurological Institute published a major study in
1975 that confirmed the theory that country doctor Dax had formulated nearly 140 years
earlier: in 96 percent of right-handed people, language is processed much more intensely
in the left hemisphere. The correlation is not as clear in lefties, however. For two thirds of
them, the left hemisphere is still the most active language processor. But for the remaining
third, either the right side is dominant or both sides work equally, controlling different
language functions. That last statistic has slowed acceptance of the notion that the
predominance of right-handedness is driven by left-hemisphere dominance in language
processing. It is not at all clear why language control should somehow have dragged the
control of body movement with it. Some experts think one reason the left hemisphere
reigns over language is because the organs of speech processing—the larynx and
tongue—are positioned on the body’s symmetry axis. Because these structures were
centered, it may have been unclear, in evolutionary terms, which side of the brain should
control them, and it seems unlikely that shared operation would result in smooth motor
activity. Language and handedness could have developed preferentially for very different
reasons as well. For example, some researchers, including evolutionary psychologist
Michael C. Corballis of the University of Auckland in New Zealand, think that the origin of
human speech lies in gestures. Gestures predated words and helped language emerge. If
the left hemisphere began to dominate speech, it would have dominated gestures, too, and
because the left brain controls the right side of the body, the right hand developed more
strongly.


F Perhaps we will know more soon. In the meantime, we can revel in what, if any,
differences handedness brings to our human talents. Popular wisdom says right-handed,
left-brained people excel at logical, analytical thinking. Lefthanded, right-brained individuals
are thought to possess more creative skills and may be better at combining the functional
features emergent in both sides of the brain. Yet some neuroscientists see such claims as
pure speculation. Fewer scientists are ready to claim that left-handedness means greater
creative potential. Yet lefties are prevalent among artists, composers and the generally
acknowledged great political thinkers. Possibly if these individuals are among the lefties
whose language abilities are evenly distributed between hemispheres, the intense interplay
required could lead to unusual mental capabilities.
G Or perhaps some lefties become highly creative simply because they must be more
clever to get by in our right-handed world. This battle, which begins during the very early
stages of childhood, may lay the groundwork for exceptional achievements.

Questions 1-5


Reading Passage has seven sections A-G.
Which section contains the following information?
Write the correct letter A-G in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.


1..................... Preference of using one side of the body in animal species.
2..................... How likely one-handedness is born.

3..................... The age when the preference of using one hand is settled.
4..................... Occupations usually found in left-handed population.
5..................... A reference to an early discovery of each hemisphere’s function.


Questions 6-9

Look at the following researchers (Questions 6-9) and the list of findings below.
Match each researcher with the correct finding.
Write the correct letter A-G in boxes 6-9 on your answer sheet.


List of Findings
A Early language evolution is correlated to body movement and thus affecting the
preference of use of one hand.
B No single biological component determines the handedness of a child.
C Each hemisphere of the brain is in charge of different body functions.
D Language process is mainly centered in the left-hemisphere of the brain.
E Speech difficulties are often caused by brain damage.
F The rate of development of one side of the body has influence on hemisphere
preference in fetus.
G Brain function already matures by the end of the fetal stage.


6..................... Marian Annett
7..................... Peter Hepper

8..................... Brenda Milner & Theodore Rasmussen
9..................... Michael Corballis


Questions 10-13


Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?
In boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet write


YES if the sataement agrees with the information
NO if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this

10..................... The study of twins shows that genetic determinationis not the only factor
for left-handedness.
11..................... Marc Dax’s report was widely accepted in his time.
12..................... Juhn Wada based his findings on his research of people with language
problems.
13..................... There tend to be more men with left-handedness than women.

Solution:

1. C 8. D
2. A 9. A

3. B 10. YES
4. F 11. NO

5. D 12. NOT GIVEN
6. B 13. NOT GIVEN

7. F
