TITLE: Biodiversity
INDEX: 67
============================================================

Biodiversity

A

It seems biodiversity has become a buzzword beloved of politicians, conservationists,
protesters and scientists alike. But what exactly is it? The Convention on Biological
Diversity, an international agreement to conserve and share the planet’s biological riches,
provides a good working definition: biodiversity comprises every form of life, from the
smallest microbe to the largest animal or plant, the genes that give them their specific
characteristics and the ecosystems of which they are apart.

B

In October, the World Conservation Union (also known as the IUCN) published its updated
Red List of Threatened Species, a roll call of 11,167 creatures facing extinction – 121 more
than when the list was last published in 2000. But the new figures almost certainly
underestimate the crisis. Some 1.2 million species of animal and 270,000 species of plant
have been classified, but the well-being of only a fraction has been assessed. The
resources are simply not available. The IUCN reports that 5714 plants are threatened, for
example, but admits that only 4 per cent of known plants has been assessed. And, of
course, there are thousands of species that we have yet to discover. Many of these could
also be facing extinction.

C

It is important to develop a picture of the diversity of life on Earth now so that comparisons
can be made in the future and trends identified. But it isn’t necessary to observe every
single type of organism in an area to get a snapshot of the health of the ecosystem. In
many habitats, there are species that are particularly susceptible to shifting conditions, and
these can be used as indicator species.

D

In the media, it is usually large, charismatic animals such as pandas, elephants, tigers and
whales that get all the attention when a loss of biodiversity is discussed. However, animals
or plants far lower down the food chain are often the ones vital for preserving habitats – in
the process saving the skins of those more glamorous species. There are known as
keystone species.

E

By studying the complex feeding relationships within habitats, species can be identified that
have a particularly important impact on the environment. For example, the members of the
fig family are the staple food for hundreds of different species in many different countries,
so important that scientists sometimes call figs “jungle burgers”. A whole range of animals,
from tiny insects to birds and large mammals, feed on everything from the tree’s bark and
leaves to its flowers and fruits. Many fig species have very specific pollinators. There are
several dozen species of the fig tree in Costa Rica, and a different type of wasp has
evolved to pollinate each one. Chris Lyle of the Natural History Museum in London – who is
also involved in the Global Taxonomy Initiative of the Convention on Biological Diversity –
points out that if fig trees are affected by global warming, pollution, disease or any other
catastrophe, the loss of biodiversity will be enormous.

F

Similarly, sea otters play a major role in the survival of giant kelp forests along the coasts of
California and Alaska. These “marine rainforests” provide a home for a wide range of other
species. The kelp itself is the main food of purple and red sea urchins and in turn, the
urchins are eaten by predators, particularly sea otters. They detach an urchin from the
seabed then float to the surface and lie on their backs with the urchin shell on their tummy,
smashing it open with a stone before eating the contents. Urchins that are not eaten tend to
spend their time in rock crevices to avoid the predators. This allows the kelp to grow – and
it can grow many centimetres in a day. As the forests form, bits of kelp break off and fall to
the bottom to provide food for the urchins in their crevices. The sea otters thrive hunting for
sea urchins in the kelp, and many other fish and invertebrates live among the fronds. The
problems start when the sea otter population declines. As large predators they are
vulnerable – their numbers are relatively small to disease or human hunters can wipe them
out. The result is that the sea urchin population grows unchecked and they roam the
seafloor eating young kelp fronds. This tends to keep the kelp very short and stops forests
developing, which has a huge impact on biodiversity.

G

Conversely, keystone species can also make dangerous alien species: they can wreak
havoc if they end up in the wrong ecosystem. The cactus moth, whose caterpillar is a
voracious eater of prickly pear was introduced to Australia to control the rampant cacti. It
was so successful that someone thought it would be a good idea to introduce it to
Caribbean islands that had the same problem. It solved the cactus menace, but
unfortunately, some of the moths have now reached the US mainland – borne on winds
and in tourists’ luggage – where they are devastating the native cactus populations of
Florida.

H

Organisations like the Convention on Biological Diversity work with groups such as the UN
and with governments and scientists to raise awareness and fund research. A number of
major international meetings – including the World Summit on Sustainable Development in
Johannesburg this year – have set targets for governments around the world to slow the
loss of biodiversity. And the CITES meeting in Santiago last month added several more
names to its list of endangered species for which trade is controlled. Of course, these
agreements will prove of limited value if some countries refuse to implement them.

I

There is cause for optimism, however. There seems to be a growing understanding of the
need for sustainable agriculture and sustainable tourism to conserve biodiversity. Problems
such as illegal logging are being tackled through sustainable forestry programmes, with the
emphasis on minimising the use of rainforest hardwoods in the developed world and on
rigorous replanting of whatever trees are harvested. CITES is playing its part by controlling
trade in wood from endangered tree species. In the same way, sustainable farming
techniques that minimise environmental damage and avoid monoculture.
J
Action at a national level often means investing in public education and awareness. Getting
people like you and me involved can be very effective. Australia and many European
countries are becoming increasingly efficient at recycling much of their domestic waste, for
example, preserving natural resources and reducing the use of fossil fuels. This, in turn,
has a direct effect on biodiversity by minimising pollution, and an indirect effect by reducing
the number of greenhouse gases emitted from incinerators and landfill sites. Preserving
ecosystems intact for future generations to enjoy is obviously important, but biodiversity is
not some kind of optional extra. Variety may be “the spice of life”, but biological variety is
also our life-support system.

Questions 1-7

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage ?
In boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement is true

FALSE if the statement is false

NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage


1..................... The term “biodiversity” consists of living creatures and the environment
that they live in.

2..................... There are species that have not been researched because it’s
unnecessary to study all creatures.

3..................... It is not necessary to investigate all creatures in a certain place.
4..................... The press more often than not focuses on animals well-known.

5..................... There is a successful case that cactus moth plays a positive role in the US.

6..................... Usage of hardwoods is forbidden in some European countries.

7..................... Agriculture experts advise farmers to plant single crops in the field in terms
of sustainable farming.


Questions 8-13

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage, using NO MORE
THAN TWO WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 8-13 on your answer sheet.


Because of the ignorance brought by media, people tend to neglect significant creatures
called 8...................... Every creature has diet connections with others, such
as 9....................., which provide a majority of foods for other species. In some states of
America, the decline in a number of sea otters leads to the boom of 10...................... An
impressing case is that imported 11..................... successfully tackles the plant cacti
in 12...................... However, the operation is needed for the government to increase its
financial support in 13......................

Solution:

1. TRUE 8. keystone
2. FALSE 9. fig family

3. TRUE 10. sea urchins
4. TRUE 11. cactus moth

5. FALSE 12. Australia
6. NOT GIVEN 13. Public education

7. NOT GIVEN
