TITLE: Bird Migration
INDEX: 70
============================================================

Bird Migration

A. Birds have many unique design features that enable them to perform such
amazing feats of endurance. They are equipped with lightweight, hollow bones,
intricately designed feathers providing both lift and thrust for rapid flight, navigation
systems superior to any that man has developed, and an ingenious heat conserving
design that, among other things, concentrates all blood circulation beneath layers of
warm, waterproof plumage, leaving them fit to face life in the harshest of climates.

Their respiratory systems have to perform efficiently during sustained flights at
altitude, so they have a system of extracting oxygen from their lungs that far
exceeds that of any other animal. During the later stages of the summer breeding
season, when food is plentiful, their bodies can accumulate considerable layers of
fat, to provide sufficient energy for their long migratory flights.

B. The fundamental reason that birds migrate is to find adequate food during the
winter months when it is in short supply. This particularly applies to birds that breed
in the temperate and Arctic regions of the Northern Hemisphere, where food is
abundant during the short growing season. Many species can tolerate cold
temperatures if food is plentiful, but when food is not available, they must migrate.
However, intriguing questions remain.

C. One puzzling fact is that many birds journey much further than would be
necessary just to find food and good weather. Nobody knows, for instance, why

British swallows, which could presumably survive equally well if they spent the
winter in equatorial Africa, instead of fly several thousands of miles further to their
preferred winter home in South Africa’s Cape Province. Another mystery involves
the huge migrations performed by arctic terns and mudflat-feeding shorebirds that
breed close to Polar Regions. In general, the further north a migrant species breeds,
the further south it spends the winter. For arctic terns, this necessitates an annual
round trip of 25,000 miles. Yet, en route to their final destination in far-flung southern
latitudes, all these individuals overfly other areas of seemingly suitable habitat
spanning two hemispheres. While we may not fully understand birds’ reasons for
going to particular places, we can marvel at their feats.

D. One of the greatest mysteries is how young birds know how to find the traditional
wintering areas without parental guidance. Very few adults migrate with juveniles in
tow, and youngsters may even have little or no inkling of their parents’ appearance.
A familiar example is that of the cuckoo, which lays its eggs in another species’ nest
and never reencounters its young. It is mind-boggling to consider that, once raised
by its host species, the young cuckoo makes its way to ancestral wintering grounds
in the tropics before returning single-handedly to northern Europe the next season
to seek out a mate among its kind. The obvious implication is that it inherits from its
parents an inbuilt route map and direction-finding capability, as well as a mental
image of what another cuckoo looks like. Yet nobody has the slightest idea as to
how this is possible.

E. Mounting evidence has confirmed that birds use the positions of the sun and
stars to obtain compass directions. They also seem to be able to detect the earth’s
magnetic field, probably due to having minute crystals of magnetite in the region of
their brains. However, accurate navigation also requires an awareness of position
and time, especially when lost. Experiments have shown that after being taken
thousands of miles over an unfamiliar landmass, birds are still capable of returning
rapidly to nest sites. Such phenomenal powers are the product of computing several
sophisticated cues, including an inborn map of the night sky and the pull of the
earth’s magnetic field. How the birds use their ‘instruments’ remains unknown, but
one thing is clear: they see the world with a superior sensory perception to ours.
Most small birds migrate at night and take their direction from the position of the
setting sun. However, as well as seeing the sun go down, they also seem to see the
plane of polarized light caused by it, which calibrates their compass. Travelling at
night provides other benefits. Daytime predators are avoided and the danger of
dehydration due to flying for long periods in warm, sunlit skies is reduced.
Furthermore, at night the air is generally cool and less turbulent and so conducive to
sustained, stable flight.

F. Nevertheless, all journeys involve considerable risk, and part of the skill in arriving safely
is setting off at the right time. This means accurate weather forecasting and utilizing
favourable winds. Birds are adept at both, and, in laboratory tests, some have been shown
to detect the minute difference in barometric pressure between the floor and ceiling of a
room. Often birds react to weather changes before there is any visible sign of them.
Lapwings, which feed on grassland, flee west from the Netherlands to the British Isles,
France, and Spain at the onset of a cold snap. When the ground surface freezes, the birds
could starve. Yet they return to Holland ahead of a thaw, their arrival linked to a pressure
change presaging an improvement in the weather.

G. In one instance a Welsh Manx shearwater carried to America and released was
back in its burrow on Skokholm Island, off the Pembrokeshire coast, one day before
a letter announcing its release! Conversely, each autumn a small number of North
American birds are blown across the Atlantic by fast-moving westerly tailwinds. Not
only do they arrive safely in Europe, but, based on ringing evidence, some make it
back to North America the following spring, after probably spending the winter with
European migrants in sunny African climes.

Questions 1-7

Reading passage has seven paragraphs, A-G.

Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-x, in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet.

List of headings
i. The best moment to migrate
ii. The unexplained rejection of closer feeding ground
iii.The influence of weather on the migration route
iv. Physical characteristics that allow birds to migrate
v. The main reason why birds migrate
vi. The best wintering grounds for birds
vii. Research findings on how birds migrate
viii. Successful migration despite the trouble of wind
ix. The contrast between long-distance migration and short-distance migration
x. Mysterious migration despite lack of teaching
1..................... Paragraph A

2..................... Paragraph B

3..................... Paragraph C

4..................... Paragraph D

5..................... Paragraph E

6..................... Paragraph F

7..................... Paragraph G


Questions 8-9

Choose TWO letters, A-E.

Write the correct letters in your answer sheet Which TWO of the following statements are
true of bird migration?

A Birds often fly further than they need to.

B Birds travelling in family groups are safe.

C Birds flying at night need less water.
D Birds have much sharper eyesight than humans.

E Only shorebirds are resistant to strong winds.


Question 10-13

Complete the sentences below using NO MORE THAN ONE WORD OR NUMBER from
the passage.

Write your answers in your answer sheet

10. It is a great mystery that young birds like cuckoos can find their wintering grounds
without 10.....................

11. Evidence shows birds can tell directions like a 11..................... by observing the sun
and the stars.

12. One advantage for birds flying at night is that they can avoid contact
with 12.....................

13. Laboratory tests show that birds can detect weather without 13..................... signs.

Solution:

1. iv 8. A
2. v 9. C

3. ii 10. Parental Guidance
4. x 11. Compass

5. vii 12. Predators
6. i 13. Visible

7. viii
