TITLE: Bondi Beach
INDEX: 73
============================================================

Bondi Beach

A

Bondi Beach, Australia’s most famous beach, is located in the suburb of Bondi, in the Local
Government Area of Waverley, seven kilometers from the centre of Sydney. “Bondi” or
“Boondi” is an Aboriginal word meaning water breaking over rocks or the sound of breaking
waves. The Australian Museum records that Bondi means a place where a flight of nullas
took place. There are Aboriginal Rock carving on the northern end of the beach at Ben
Buckler and south of Bondi Beach near McKenzies Beach on the coastal walk.

B

The indigenous people of the area at the time of European settlement have generally been
welcomed to as the Sydney people or the Eora (Eora means “the people”). One theory
describes the Eora as a sub-group of the Darug language group which occupied the
Cumberland Plain west to the Blue Mountains. However, another theory suggests that they
were a distinct language group of their own. There is no clear evidence for the name or
names of the particular band(s) of the Eora that roamed what is now the Waverley area. A
number of place names within Waverley, most famously Bondi, have been based on words
derived from Aboriginal languages of the Sydney region.

C

From the mid-1800s Bondi Beach was a favourite location for family outings and picnics.
The beginnings of the suburb go back to 1809, when the early road builder, William
Roberts, received from Governor Bligh a grant of 81 hectares of what is now most of the
business and residential area of Bondi Beach. In 1851, Edward Smith Hall and Francis
O’Brien purchased 200 acres of the Bondi area that embraced almost the whole frontage of
Bondi Beach, and it was named the “The Bondi Estate.” Between 1855 and 1877 O’Brien
purchased Hall’s share of the land, renamed the land the “O’Brien Estate,” and made the
beach and the surrounding land available to the public as a picnic ground and amusement
resort. As the beach became increasingly popular, O’Brien threatened to stop public beach
access. However, the Municipal Council believed that the Government needed to intervene
to make the beach a public reserve.

D
During the 1900s beach became associated with health, leisure and democracy – a
playground everyone could enjoy equally. Bondi Beach was a working-class suburb
throughout most of the twentieth century with migrant people from New Zealand comprising
the majority of the local population. The first tramway reached the beach in 1884. Following
this, tram became the first public transportation in Bondi. As an alternative, this action
changed the rule that only rich people can enjoy the beach. By the 1930s Bondi was
drawing not only local visitors but also people from elsewhere in Australia and overseas.
Advertising at the time referred to Bondi Beach as the “Playground of the Pacific”.

E

There is a growing trend that people prefer having to relax near seaside instead of living
unhealthily in cities. The increasing popularity of sea bathing during the late 1800s and
early 1900s raised concerns about public safety and how to prevent people from drowning.
In response, the world’s first formally documented surf lifesaving club, the Bondi Surf
Bathers’ Life Saving Club, was formed in 1907. This was powerfully reinforced by the
dramatic events of “Black Sunday” at Bondi in 1938. Some 35,000 people were on the
beach and a large group of lifesavers were about to start a surf race when three freak
waves hit the beach, sweeping hundreds of people out to sea. Lifesavers rescued 300
people. The largest mass rescue in the history of surf bathing, it confirmed the place of the
lifesaver in the national imagination.

F

Bondi Beach is the endpoint of the City to Surf Fun Run which is held each year in August.
Australian surf carnivals further instilled this image. A Royal Surf Carnival was held at
Bondi Beach for Queen Elizabeth II during her first visited in Australia in 1954. Since 1867,
there have been over fifty visits by a member of the British Royal Family to Australia. In
addition to many activities, the Bondi Beach Markets is open every Sunday. Many wealthy
people spend Christmas Day at the beach. However, the shortage of houses occurs when
lots of people crushed to the seaside. Manly is the seashore town which solved this
problem. However, people still choose Bondi as the satisfied destination rather than Manly.

G

Bondi Beach has a commercial area along Campbell Parade and adjacent side streets,
featuring many popular cafes, restaurants, and hotels, with views of the contemporary
beach. It is depicted as wholly modern and European. In the last decade, Bondi Beaches’
unique position has seen a dramatic rise in svelte houses and apartments to take
advantage of the views and scent of the sea. The valley running down to the beach is the
famous world over for its view of distinctive red-tiled roofs. Those architectures are deeply
influenced by British coastal town.

H
Bondi Beach hosted the beach volleyball competition at the 2000 Summer Olympics. A
temporary 10,000-seat stadium, a much smaller stadium, 2 warm-up courts, and 3 training
courts were set up to host the tournament. The Bondi Beach Volleyball Stadium was
constructed for it and stood for just six weeks. Campaigners oppose both the social and
environmental consequences of the development. The stadium will divide the beach in two
and seriously restrict public access for swimming, walking, and other forms of outdoor
recreation. People protest for their human rights of having a pure seaside and argue for
health life in Bondi.

I

“They’re prepared to risk lives and risk the Bondi beach environment for the sake of eight
days of volleyball”, said Stephen Uniacke, a construction lawyer involved in the campaign.
Other environmental concerns include the possibility that soil dredged up from below the
sand will acidify when brought to the surface.

Questions 1-5

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?
In boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information


FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this


1..................... The name of the Bondi beach is first called by the British settlers.

2..................... The aboriginal culture in Australia is different when compared with
European culture.

3..................... Bondi beach area holds many contemporary hotels

4..................... The seaside town in Bondi is affected by British culture for its characteristic
red color

5..................... Living near Bondi seashore is not beneficial for health.


Questions 6-9

Answer the questions below using NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS AND/OR
NUMBERS from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 6-9 on your answer sheet


6..................... At the end of the 19th century, which public transport did people use to go
to Bondi?


7..................... When did the British Royalty first visit Bondi?

8..................... Which Olympic event did Bondi hold in the 2000 Sydney Olympic games?

9..................... What would be damaged if the stadium was built for that Olympic event?


Questions 10-13

Summary
Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage, using NO MORE
THAN TWO WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet.
Bondi beach holds the feature sports activities every year, which attracts lo
of 10...................... Choosing to live at this place during the holidays. But local
accommodation cannot meet with the expanding population, a nearby town
of 11...................... is the first suburb site to support the solution, yet people
prefer 12..................... as their best choice. Its seaside buildings are well-known in the
world for the special scenic colored 13..................... on buildings and the joyful smell from
the sea.

Solution:

1. FALSE 8. beach volleyball
2. NOT GIVEN 9. environment

3. NOT GIVEN 10. wealthy people
4. TRUE 11. manly

5. FALSE 12. Bondi
6. tram 13. tiled roofs

7. 1954
