TITLE: Book review on Musicophilia
INDEX: 74
============================================================

Book review on Musicophilia

Norman M. Weinberger reviews the latest work of Oliver Sacks on music.

A

Music and the brain are both endlessly fascinating subjects, and as a neuroscientist
specialising in auditory learning and memory, I find them especially intriguing. So I had high
expectations of Musicophilia, the latest offering from neurologist and prolific author Oliver
Sacks. And I confess to feeling a little guilty reporting that my reactions to the book are
mixed.

B

Sacks himself is the best part of Musicophilia. He richly documents his own life in the book
and reveals highly personal experiences. The photograph of him on the cover of the book-
which shows him wearing headphones, eyes closed, clearly enchanted as he listens to
Alfred Brendel perform Beethoven’s Pathetique Sonata-makes a positive impression that is
borne out by the contents of the book. Sacks’ voice throughout is steady and erudite but
never pontifical. He is neither self-conscious nor self-promoting.

C

The preface gives a good idea of what the book will deliver. In it, Sacks explains that he
wants to convey the insights gleaned from the “enormous and rapidly growing body of work
on the neural underpinnings of musical perception and imagery, and the complex and often
bizarre disorders to which these are prone.” He also stresses the importance of “the simple
art of observation” and “the richness of the human context.” He wants to combine
“observation and description with the latest in technology,” he says, and to imaginatively
enter into the experience of his patients and subjects. The reader can see that Sacks, who
has been practicing neurology for 40 years, is torn between the “old-fashioned” path of
observation and the new-fangled, high-tech approach: He knows that he needs to take
heed of the latter, but his heart lies with the former.

D

The book consists mainly of detailed descriptions of cases, most of them involving patients
whom Sacks has seen in his practice. Brief discussions of contemporary neuroscientific
reports are sprinkled liberally throughout the text. Part, “Haunted by Music,” begins with the
strange case of Tony Cicoria, a nonmusical, middle-aged surgeon who was consumed by a
love of music after being hit by lightning. He suddenly began to crave listening to piano
music, which he had never cared for in the past. He started to play the piano and then to
compose music, which arose spontaneously in his mind in a “torrent” of notes. How could
this happen? Was the cause psychological? (He had had a near-death experience when
the lightning struck him.) Or was it the direct result of a change in the auditory regions of
his cerebral cortex? Electroencephalography (EEG) showed his brain waves to be normal
in the mid-1990s, just after his trauma and subsequent “conversion” to music. There are
now more sensitive tests, but Cicoria, has declined to undergo them; he does not want to
delve into the causes of his musicality. What a shame!

E
Part II, “A Range of Musicality,” covers a wider variety of topics, but unfortunately, some of
the chapters offer little or nothing that is new. For example, chapter 13, which is five pages
long, merely notes that the blind often has better hearing than the sighted. The most
interesting chapters are those that present the strangest cases. Chapter 8 is about
“amusia,” an inability to hear sounds like music, and “dysharmonia,” a highly specific
impairment of the ability to hear harmony, with the ability to understand melody left intact.
Such specific “dissociations” are found throughout the cases Sacks recounts.

F
To Sacks’s credit, part III, “Memory, Movement and Music,” brings us into the
underappreciated realm of music therapy. Chapter 16 explains how “melodic intonation
therapy” is being used to help expressive aphasic patients (those unable to express their
thoughts verbally following a stroke or other cerebral incident) once again become capable
of fluent speech. In chapter 20, Sacks demonstrates the near-miraculous power of music to
animate Parkinson’s patients and other people with severe movement disorders, even
those who are frozen into odd postures. Scientists cannot yet explain how music achieves
this effect

G

To readers who are unfamiliar with neuroscience and music behavior, Musicophilia may be
something of a revelation. But the book will not satisfy those seeking the causes and
implications of the phenomena Sacks describes. For one thing, Sacks appears to be more
at ease discussing patients than discussing experiments. And he tends to be rather
uncritical in accepting scientific findings and theories.

H

It’s true that the causes of music-brain oddities remain poorly understood. However, Sacks
could have done more to draw out some of the implications of the careful observations that
he and other neurologists have made and of the treatments that have been successful. For
example, he might have noted that the many specific dissociations among components of
music comprehension, such as loss of the ability to perceive harmony but not melody,
indicate that there is no music center in the brain. Because many people who read the
book are likely to believe in the brain localisation of all mental functions, this was a missed
educational opportunity.

I

Another conclusion one could draw is that there seem to be no “cures” for neurological
problems involving music. A drug can alleviate a symptom in one patient and aggravate it
in another or can have both positive and negative effects in the same patient. Treatments
mentioned seem to be almost exclusively antiepileptic medications, which “damp down” the
excitability of the brain in general; their effectiveness varies widely.

J

Finally, in many of the cases described here the patient with music-brain symptoms is
reported to have “normal” EEG results. Although Sacks recognises the existence of new
technologies, among them far more sensitive ways to analyze brain waves than the
standard neurological EEG test, he does not call for their use. In fact, although he exhibits
the greatest compassion for patients, he conveys no sense of urgency about the pursuit of
new avenues in the diagnosis and treatment of music-brain disorders. This absence
echoes the book’s preface, in which Sacks expresses fear that “the simple art of
observation may be lost” if we rely too much on new technologies. He does call for both
approaches, though, and we can only hope that the neurological community will respond.

Questions 1-4

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write your answers in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.


1. Why does the writer have a mixed feeling about the book?

A The guilty feeling made him so.
B The writer expected it to be better than it was.

C Sacks failed to include his personal stories in the book.

D This is the only book written by Sacks.


2. What is the best part of the book?

A the photo of Sacks listening to music

B the tone of voice of the book

C the autobiographical description in the book
D the description of Sacks’ wealth


3. In the preface, what did Sacks try to achieve?

A make a herald introduction of the research work and technique applied

B give a detailed description of various musical disorders

C explain why he needs to do away with the simple observation

D explain why he needs to do away with the simple observation


4.What is disappointing about Tony Cicoria’s case?

A He refuses to have further tests.

B He can’t determine the cause of his sudden musicality.

C He nearly died because of the lightening.

D His brain waves were too normal to show anything.


Questions 5-10

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage?
In boxes 5-10 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the views of the writer

FALSE if the statement contradicts with the views of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this


5..................... It is difficult to give a well-reputable writer a less than totally favorable
review.

6..................... Beethoven’s Pathetique Sonata is a good treatment for musical disorders.

7..................... Sacks believes technological methods is of little importance compared with
traditional observation when studying his patients.

8..................... It is difficult to understand why music therapy is undervalued

9..................... Sacks held little skepticism when borrowing other theories and findings in
describing reasons and notion for phenomena he depicts in the book.

10..................... Sacks is in a rush to use new testing methods to do treatment for
patients.


Questions 11-14

Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-F, below.

Write the correct letter, A-F, in boxes 11-14 on your answer sheet.

11..................... The content covered dissociations in understanding between harmony
and melody

12..................... The study of treating musical disorders

13..................... The EEG scans of Sacks’ patients

14..................... Sacks believes testing based on new technologies

A show no music-brain disorders.

B indicates that medication can have varied results.

C is key for the neurological community to unravel the mysteries.
D should not be used in isolation.

E indicate that not everyone can receive a good education.

F show a misconception that there is a function centre localized in the brain

Solution:

1. B 8. NOT GIVEN
2. C 9. YES

3. A 10. NO
4. A 11. F

5. YES 12. B
6. NOT GIVEN 13. A

7. NO 14. D
