TITLE: California’s age of Megafires
INDEX: 82
============================================================

California’s age of Megafires

A

There’s a reason fire squads now battling more than a dozen blazes in southern California
are having such difficulty containing the flames, despite better preparedness than ever and
decades of experience fighting fires fanned by the notorious Santa Ana winds. The wildfires
themselves, experts say, generally are hotter, move faster, and spread more erratically
than in the past.

B
The short-term explanation is that the region, which usually has dry summers, has had nine
inches less rain than normal this year. Longer-term, climate change across the West is
leading to hotter days on average and longer fire seasons. Experts say this is likely to yield
more megafires like the conflagrations that this week forced evacuations of at least
300,000 resident in California’s southland and led President Bush to declare a disaster
emergency in seven counties on Tuesday.

C

Megafires, also called “siege fires,” are the increasingly frequent blazes that burn 500,000
acres or more – 10 times the size of the average forest fire of 20 years ago. One of the
current wildfires is the sixth biggest in California ever, in terms of acreage burned,
according to state figures and news reports. The trend to more superhot fires, experts say,
has been driven by a century-long policy of the US Forest Service to stop wildfires as
quickly as possible. The unintentional consequence was to halt the natural eradication of
underbrush, now the primary fuel for megafires. Three other factors contribute to the trend,
they add. First is climate change marked by a 1-degree F. rise in average yearly
temperature across the West. Second is a fire season that on average is 78 days longer
than in the late 1980s. The third is the increased building of homes and other structures in
wooded areas.

D

“We are increasingly building our homes … in fire-prone ecosystems,” says Dominik
Kulakowski, adjunct professor of biology at Clark University Graduate School of Geography
in Worcester, Mass. Doing that “in many of the forests of the Western US … is like building
homes on the side of an active volcano.” In California, where population growth has
averaged more than 600,000 a year for at least a decade, housing has pushed into such
areas. “What once was open space is now residential homes providing fuel to make fires
burn with greater intensity,” says Terry McHale of the California Department of Forestry
firefighters union. “With so much dryness, so many communities to catch fire, so many
fronts to fight, it becomes an almost incredible job.”

E

That said, many experts give California high marks for making progress on preparedness
since 2003, when the largest fires in state history scorched 750,000 acres, burned 3,640
homes, and killed 22 people. Stung then by criticism of bungling that allowed fires to
spread when they might have been contained, personnel are meeting the peculiar
challenges of a neighborhood – and canyon-hopping fires better than in recent years,
observers say.

F

State promises to provide newer engines, planes, and helicopters have been fulfilled.
Firefighters unions that then complained of dilapidated equipment, old fire engines and
insufficient blueprints for fire safety are now praising the state’s commitment, noting that
funding for firefighting has increased despite huge cuts in many other programs. “We are
pleased that the Schwarzenegger administration has been very proactive in its support of
us and come through with budgetary support of the infrastructure needs we have long
sought,” says Mr McHale with the firefighters union.
G

Besides providing money to upgrade the fire engines that must traverse the mammoth
state and wind along serpentine canyon roads, the state has invested in better command-
and-control facilities as well as the strategies to run them. “In the fire sieges of earlier
years, we found out that we had the willingness of mutual-aid help from other jurisdictions
and states, but we were not able to communicate adequately with them,” says Kim Zagaris,
chief of the state’s Office of Emergency Services, fire and rescue branch. After a 2004
blue-ribbon commission examined and revamped those procedures, the statewide
response “has become far more professional and responsive,” he says.

H

Besides ordering the California National Guard on Monday to make 1,500 guardsmen
available for firefighting efforts, Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger asked the Pentagon to send
all available Modular Airborne Fighting Systems to the area. The military Lockheed C-130
cargo/utility aircraft carry a pressurized 3,000-gallon tank that can eject fire retardant or
water in fewer than five seconds through two tubes at the rear of the plane. This load can
cover an area 1/4-mile long and 60 feet wide to create a fire barrier. Governor
Schwarzenegger also directed 2,300 inmate firefighters and 170 custody staff from the

California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation to work for hand in hand with state
and local firefighters.

I
Residents and government officials alike are noting the improvements with gratitude, even
amid the loss of homes, churches, businesses, and farms. By Tuesday morning, the fires
had burned 1,200 homes and businesses and set 245,957 acres – 384 square miles –
ablaze. Despite such losses, there is a sense that the speed, dedication, and coordination
of firefighters from several states and jurisdictions are resulting in greater efficiency than in
past “siege fire” situations.

J

“I am extraordinarily impressed by the improvements we have witnessed between the last
big fire and this,” says Ross Simmons, a San Diego-based lawyer who had to evacuate
both his home and business on Monday, taking up residence at a Hampton Inn 30 miles
south of his home in Rancho Bernardo. After fires consumed 172,000 acres there in 2003,
the San Diego region turned communitywide soul-searching into improved building codes,
evacuation procedures, and procurement of new technology. Mr Simmons and neighbors
began receiving automated phone calls at 3:30 a.m. Monday morning telling them to
evacuate. “Notwithstanding all the damage that will be caused by this, we will not come
close to the loss of life because of what we have … put in place since then,” he says.

Questions 1-6

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage

Using NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.


Write your answers in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.


Experts point out that blazes in California are having more heat, faster speed and
they 1..................... more unpredictably compared with former ones. One explanation is
that California’s summer is dry, 2..................... is below the average point. Another long
term explanation is that hotter and longer potential days occur due
to 3...................... Nowadays, Megafires burn 4..................... the size of forest area caused
by an ordinary fire of 20 years ago. The serious trend is mainly caused by well-grown
underbrush, which provides 5..................... for the siege fires. Other contributors are
climate change and extended 6......................


Questions 7-9

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write your answers in boxes 7-9 on your answer sheet.


7 What is the expert’s attitude towards California’s performance after 2003 megafire?

A They could have done better

B Blamed them on casualties
C Improvement made on preparation

D Serious criticism


8 According to Governor Schwarzenegger, which one is CORRECT about his effort for
firefighting?

A Schwarzenegger requested successfully for military weapons


B Schwarzenegger led many prison management staff to work together with local
firefighters

C Schwarzenegger acted negatively in recent megafire in California

D Schwarzenegger ordered 1,500 office clerk to join firefighting scene.
9 What happened to Ross Simmon on the day of megafire breakout?

A He was sleeping till morning

B He was doing business at Hampton Inn

C He suffered employee death on that morning

D He was alarmed by machine calls


Questions 10-13

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?

In boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet, write
TRUE if the statement is true

FALSE if the statement is false

NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage


10..................... The area of open space in California has declined during the past
decade.


11..................... Fire squad wants to recruit more firefighters this year.

12..................... Firefighters union declared that firefighters have had the more improved
and supportive facility by the local government.

13..................... Before the year of 2004, well coordination and communication between
California and other states already existed in fire siege.

Solution:

1. spread 8. B
2. rainfall 9. D

3. climate change 10. TRUE
4. 10 times 11. NOT GIVEN

5. primary fuel 12. TRUE
6. fire season 13. FALSE

7. C
