TITLE: Can Scientists tell us: What happiness is?
INDEX: 83
============================================================

Can Scientists tell us: What happiness is?

A

Economists accept that if people describe themselves as happy, then they are happy.
However, psychologists differentiate between levels of happiness. The most immediate
type involves a feeling; pleasure or joy. But sometimes happiness is a judgment that life is
satisfying, and does not imply an emotional state. Esteemed psychologist Martin Seligman
has spearheaded an effort to study the science of happiness. The bad news is that we’re
not wired to be happy. The good news is that we can do something about it. Since its
origins in a Leipzig laboratory 130 years ago, psychology has had little to say about
goodness and contentment. Mostly psychologists have concerned themselves with
weakness and misery. There are libraries full of theories about why we get sad, worried,
and angry. It hasn’t been respectable science to study what happens when lives go well.
Positive experiences, such as joy, kindness, altruism and heroism, have mainly been
ignored. For every 100 psychology papers dealing with anxiety or depression, only one
concerns a positive trait.

B

A few pioneers in experimental psychology bucked the trend. Professor Alice Isen of
Cornell University and colleagues have demonstrated how positive emotions make people
think faster and more creatively. Showing how easy it is to give people an intellectual
boost, Isen divided doctors making a tricky diagnosis into three groups: one received
candy, one read humanistic statements about medicine, one was a control group. The
doctors who had candy displayed the most creative thinking and worked more efficiently.

Inspired by Isen and others, Seligman got stuck in. He raised millions of dollars of research
money and funded 50 research groups involving 150 scientists across the world. Four
positive psychology centres opened, decorated in cheerful colours and furnished with sofas
and baby-sitters. There were get-togethers on Mexican beaches where psychologists
would snorkel and eat fajitas, then form “pods” to discuss subjects such as wonder and
awe. A thousand therapists were coached in the new science.

C

But critics are demanding answers to big questions. What is the point of defining levels of
haziness and classifying the virtues? Aren’t these concepts vague and impossible to pin
down? Can you justify spending funds to research positive states when there are problems
such as famine, flood and epidemic depression to be solved? Seligman knows his work
can be belittled alongside trite notions such as “the power of positive thinking”. His plan to
stop the new science floating “on the waves of self- improvement fashion” is to make sure it
is anchored to positive philosophy above, and to positive biology below.

D

And this takes us back to our evolutionary past Homo sapiens evolved during the
Pleistocene era (1.8 m to 10,000 years ago), a time of hardship and turmoil. It was the Ice
Age, and our ancestors endured long freezes as glaciers formed, then ferocious floods as
the ice masses melted. We shared the planet with terrifying creatures such as mammoths,
elephant-sized ground sloths and sabre-toothed cats. But by the end of the Pleistocene, all
these animals were extinct. Humans, on the other hand, had evolved large brains and used
their intelligence to make fire and sophisticated tools, to develop talk and social rituals.
Survival in a time of adversity forged our brains into a persistent mould. Professor
Seligman says: “Because our brain evolved during a time of ice, flood and famine, we have
a catastrophic brain. The way the brain works is looking for what’s wrong. The problem is,
that worked in the Pleistocene era. It favoured you, but it doesn’t work in the modem
world”.

E
Although most people rate themselves as happy, there is a wealth of evidence to show that
negative thinking is deeply ingrained in the human psyche. Experiments show that we
remember failures more vividly than success. We dwell on what went badly, not what went
well. Of the six universal emotions, four anger, fear, disgust and sadness are negative and
only one, joy, is positive. (The sixth, surprise, is neutral). According to the psychologist
Daniel Nettle, author of Happiness, and one of the Royal Institution lectures, the negative
emotion each tells us “something bad has happened” and suggest a different course of
action.

F

What is it about the structure of the brain that underlies our bias towards negative thinking?
And is there a biology of joy? At Iowa University, neuroscientist studied what happens
when people are shown pleasant and unpleasant pictures. When subjects see landscapes
or dolphins playing, part of the frontal lobe of the brain becomes active. But when they are
shown unpleasant images a bird covered in oil, or a dead soldier with part of his face
missing the response comes from more primitive parts of the brain. The ability to feel
negative emotions derives from an ancient danger-recognition system formed early in the
brain’s evolution. The pre-frontal cortex, which registers happiness, is the part used for
higher thinking, an area that evolved later in human history.

G

Our difficulty, according to Daniel Nettle, is that the brain systems for liking and wanting are
separate. Wanting involves two ancient regions the amygdala and the nucleus accumbens
that communicate using the chemical dopamine to form the brain’s reward system. They
are involved in anticipating the pleasure of eating and in addiction to drugs. A rat will press
a bar repeatedly ignoring sexually available partners, to receive electrical stimulation of the
“wanting” parts of the brain. But having received brain stimulation, the rat eats more but
shows no sign of enjoying the food it craved. In humans, a drug like nicotine produces
much craving but little pleasure.

H

In essence, what the biology lesson tells us is that negative emotions are fundamental to
the human condition and it’s no wonder they are difficult to eradicate. At the same time, by
a trick of nature, our brains are designed to crave but never really achieve lasting
happiness.

Questions 1-7

The reading Passage has seven paragraphs A-H.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter A-H, in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet.


1..................... An experiment involving dividing several groups one of which received
positive icon

2..................... Review of a poorly researched psychology area

3..................... Contrast being made about the brains’ action as response to positive or
negative stimulus

4..................... The skeptical attitude toward the research seemed to be a waste of fund

5..................... a substance that produces much wanting instead of much liking
6..................... a conclusion that lasting happiness is hardly obtained because of the
nature of brains
7..................... One description that listed the human emotional categories.


Questions 8-12

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage

Using NO MORE THAN FOUR WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 8-12 on your answer sheet.


A few pioneers in experimental psychology study what happens when lives go well.
Professor Alice divided doctors, making a tricky experiment, into three groups: besides the
one control group, the other two either are asked to read humanistic statements about
drugs or received 8..................... The latter displayed the most creative thinking and
worked more efficiently. Since critics are questioning the significance of the 9.....................
for both levels of happiness and classification for the virtues. Professor Seligman countered
in an evolutional theory: survival in a time of adversity forged our brains into the way of
thinking for what’s wrong because we have a 10......................

There is bountiful of evidence to show that negative thinking is deeply built in the human
psyche. Later, at Iowa University, neuroscientists studied the active parts in brains to
contrast when people are shown pleasant and unpleasant pictures. When positive images
like 11..................... are shown, part of the frontal lobe of the brain becomes active. But
when they are shown unpleasant image, the response comes from 12..................... of the
brain.

Question 13

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write your answers in boxes 13 on your answer sheet.

According to Daniel Nettle in the last two paragraphs, what is true as the scientists can tell
us about happiness

A Brain systems always mix liking and wanting together.

B Negative emotions can be easily rid of if we think positively.

C Happiness is like nicotine we are craving for but get little pleasure.

D The inner mechanism of human brains does not assist us to achieve durable
happiness

Solution:

1. B 8. Candy
2. A 9. definition

3. F 10. a catastrophic brain
4. C 11. landscapes or dolphins playing

5. G 12. primitive parts
6. H 13. D

7. E
