TITLE: Carbon Capture and Storage
INDEX: 86
============================================================

Carbon Capture and Storage

High coal dependence

Renewable energy is much discussed, but coal still plays the greatest role in the generation
of electricity, with recent figures from the International Energy Agency showing that China
relies on it for 79% of its power, Australia for 78%, and the US for 45%. Germany has less
reliance at 41%, which is also the global average. Furthermore, many countries have large,
easily accessible deposits of coal, and numerous highly skilled miners, chemists, and
engineers. Meanwhile, 70% of the world’s steel production requires coal, and plastic and
rayon are usually coal derivatives.

Currently, coal-fired power plants fed voracious appetites, but they produce carbon dioxide
(CO2) in staggering amounts. Urbanites may grumble about an average monthly electricity
bill of $113, yet they steadfastly ignore the fact that they are not billed for the 6-7 million
metric tons of CO2 their local plant belches out, which contribute to the 44% of global CO2
levels from fossil-fuel emissions. Yet, as skies fill with smog and temperatures soar, people
crave clean air and cheap power.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change that advises the United Nations has
testified that the threshold of serious harm to the Earth’s temperature is a mere 2° Celsius
above current levels, so it is essential to reduce carbon emissions by 80% over the next 30
years, even as demand for energy will rise by 50%, and one proposal for this is the
adoption of carbon capture and storage (CCS).

Underground carbon storage

Currently, CO2 storage, or sequestration as it is known, is practised by the oil and gas
industry, where CO2 is pumped into oil fields to maintain pressure and ease extraction –
one metric ton dissolves out about three barrels, or separated from natural gas and
pumped out of exhausted coal fields or other deep seams. The CO2 remains underground
or is channelled into disused sandstone reservoirs. However, the sale of oil and natural gas
is profitable, so the $17-per-ton sequestration cost is easily borne. There is also a plan for
the injection of CO2 into saline aquifers, 1,000 metres beneath the seabed, to prevent its
release into the atmosphere.

Carbon capture
While CO2 storage has been accomplished, its capture from power plants remains largely
hypothetical, although CCS plants throughout Western Europe and North America are on
the drawing board.

There are three main forms of CCS: pre-combustion, post-combustion, and oxy-firing. In a
2012 paper from the US Congressional Budget Office (CBO), post-combustion capture was
viewed most favourably since existing power plants can be retrofitted with it, whereas pre-
combustion and oxy-firing mean the construction of entirely new plants. However, pre-
combustion and oxy-firing remove more CO2 than post-combustion and generate more
electricity.

Post-combustion capture means CO2 is separated from gas after coal is burnt but before
electricity is generated, while in oxy-firing, coal is combusted in pure oxygen. In pre-
combustion, as in an Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle system (IGCC), oxygen, coal,
and water ae burnt together to produce a synthetic gas called Syngas – mainly hydrogen –
which drives two sets of turbines, firstly gas-driven ones, then, as the cooling Syngas travel
through water, steam-driven ones. Emissions from this process contain around ten percent
of the CO2 that burning coal produces.

The pros and cons of CCS

Several countries are keen to scale up CCS as it may reduce carbon emissions quickly,
and powerful lobby groups for CCS exist among professionals in mining and engineering.
Foundries and refineries that produce steel and emit carbon may also benefit, and the oil
and gas industry is interested because power-plant equipment consumes their products. In
addition, recent clean energy acts in many countries mandate that a percentage of
electricity be generated by renewables or by more energy-efficient systems, like CCS.

As with desalination, where powerful lobbies wield influence, states sometimes find it
easier to engage in large projects involving a few players rather than change behaviours on
a more scattered household scale. Furthermore, replacing coal with zero-emission
photovoltaic (PV) cells to produce solar energy would require covering an area nearly
20,720 square kilometres, roughly twice the size of Lebanon or half of Denmark.

Still, there are many reservations about CCS. Principally, it is enormously expensive:
conservative estimates put the electricity it generates at more than five times the current
retail price. As consumers are unlikely to want to bear this price hike, massive state
subsidies would be necessary for CCS to work.

The capital outlay of purchasing equipment for retrofitting existing power plants is high
enough, but the energy needed to capture CO2 means one third more coal must be burnt,
and building new CCS plants is at least 75% more expensive than retro-fitting.

Some CCS technology is untried, for example, the Syngas-driven turbines in an IGCC
system have not been used on an industrial scale. Post capture, CO2 must be compressed
into a supercritical liquid for transport and storage, which is also costly. The Qatar

Carbonates and Carbon Storage Research Centre predicts 700 million barrels per day of
this liquid would be produced if CCS were adopted modestly. It is worth noting that current
oil production is around 85 million barrels per day, so CCS would produce eleven
times more waste for burial than oil that was simultaneously being extracted.

Sequestration has been used successfully, but there are limited coal and oil fields where
optimal conditions exist. In rock that is too brittle, earthquakes could release the CO2.
Moreover, proposals to store CO2 in saline aquifers are just that – proposals: sequestration
has never been attempted in aquifers.

Most problematic of all, CCS reduces carbon emissions but does not end them, rendering it
a medium-term solution.

Alternatives

There are at least four reasonably-priced alternatives to CCS. Firstly, conventional
pulverised coal power plants are undergoing redesign so more electricity can be produced
from less coal. Before coal is phased out – as ultimately it will have to be – these plants
could be more cost-eective. Secondly, hybrid plants using natural gas and coal could be
built. Thirdly, natural gas could be used on its own. Lastly, solar power is fast gaining
credibility.

In all this, an agreed measure of cost for electricity generation must be used. This is called
a levelized cost of energy (LCOE) – an average cost of producing electricity over the
lifetime of a power plant, including construction, financing, and operation, although pollution
is not counted. In 2012, the CBO demonstrated that a new CCS plant had an LCOE of
about $0.09-0.15 per kilowatt-hour (kWh), but according to the US Energy Information
Administration, the LCOE from a conventional natural gas power plant without CCS is

$0.0686/kWh, making it the cheapest way to produce clean energy.
Solar power costs are falling rapidly. In 2013, the Los Angeles Department of Water and

Power reported that energy via a purchase agreement from a large solar plant was
$0.095/kWh, and Greentech Media, a company that reviews environmental projects, found
a 2014 New Mexico solar project that generates power for $0.0849/kWh.

Still, while so much coal and so many coal-fired plants exist, decommissioning them all
may not be realistic. Whatever happens, the conundrum of cheap power and clean air may
remain unsolved for some time.

Questions 1-2

Choose the correct letter A, B, C, or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 1-2 on your answer sheet.


1. What is the global average for electricity generated from coal?

A 41%
B 44%

C 49%

D 70%


2. What does the average American pay each month for CO2 produced by a local power
plant?

A $17

B $80

C $113

D Nothing


Questions 3-8

Label the diagrams on the following page.

Write the correct letter, A-H, in boxes 3-8 (IMAGE 29-34) on your answer sheet.

A CO2 B Coal C Natural gas
D Oil E Saline aquifer F Steam-driven turbines

G Syngas H Syngas-driven turbines

3.....................

4.....................

5.....................

6.....................

7.....................

8.....................
Carbon dioxide sequestration


Questions 9-14

Complete the table below.
Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER from the passage for
each answer.
Write your answer in boxes 9-14 on your answer sheet.

Advantages of CCS Disadvantages of CCS
The construction of new and the conversion of existing

Sequestration is already power plants and the liquefaction and transport of
used in the oil and gas CO2 are very costly. While sequestration is possible,
sector. the scale would be enormous. Therefore, CCS would
CCS may need 12......................
cut 9..................... in a Some CCS technology is 13...................... Gas-driven
short time. turbines for IGCC have not been used on an industrial
10..................... in scale.
labour, Shallow underground storage may be limited; deep
industry, and states ocean storage is currently impossible. Geologists fear
already support CCS. leaks in quake-prone regions.
Alternatives, like Natural gas and solar PVs are cheaper. LCOE
11..................... energy, estimates for
take up vast amounts of CCS = $0.09-15/kWh; for natural
space. gas= 14.....................;
and, for solar PV = $0.0849/kWh.

Solution:

1. A 8. F
2. D 9. carbon emissions

3. A 10. powerful lobbies
4. C 11. solar

5. E 12. massive state subsidies
6. B 13. untried

7. G 14. $0.0686/kWh
