TITLE: Collecting Ant Specimens
INDEX: 102
============================================================

Collecting Ant Specimens

Collecting ants can be as simple as picking up stray ones and placing them in a glass jar,
or as complicated as completing an exhaustive survey of all species present in an area and
estimating their relative abundances. The exact method used will depend on the final
purpose of the collections. For taxonomy, or classification, long series, from a single nest,
which contain all castes (workers, including majors and minors, and, if present, queens and
males) are desirable, to allow the determination of variation within species. For ecological
studies, the most important factor is collecting identifiable samples of as many of the
different species present as possible. Unfortunately, these methods are not always
compatible. The taxonomist sometimes overlooks whole species in favour of those groups
currently under study, while the ecologist often collects only a limited number of specimens
of each species, thus reducing their value for taxonomic investigations.

To collect as wide a range of species as possible, several methods must be used. These
include hand collecting, using baits to attract the ants, ground litter sampling, and the
use of pitfall traps. Hand collecting consists of searching for ants everywhere they are
likely to occur. This includes on the ground, under rocks, logs or other objects on the
ground, in rotten wood on the ground or on trees, in vegetation, on tree trunks and under
bark. When possible, collections should be made from nests or foraging columns and at
least 20 to 25 individuals collected. This will ensure that all individuals are of the same
species, and so increase their value for detailed studies. Since some species are largely
nocturnal, collecting should not be confined to daytime. Specimens are collected using an
aspirator (often called a pooter), forceps, a fine, moistened paint brush, or fingers, if the
ants are known not to sting. Individual insects are placed in plastic or glass tubes (1.5-3-0
ml capacity for small ants, 5-8 ml for larger ants) containing 75% to 95% ethanol. Plastic
tubes with secure tops are better than glass because they are lighter, and do not break as
easily if mishandled.

Baits can be used to attract and concentrate foragers. This often increases the number of
individuals collected and attracts species that are otherwise elusive. Sugars and meats or
oils will attract different species and a range should be utilised. These baits can be placed
either on the ground or on the trunks of trees or large shrubs. When placed on the ground,
baits should be situated on small paper cards or other flat, light-coloured surfaces, or in
test-tubes or vials. This makes it easier to spot ants and to capture them before they can
escape into the surrounding leaf litter.

Many ants are small and forage primarily in the layer of leaves and other debris on the
ground. Collecting these species by hand can be difficult. One of the most successful
ways to collect them is to gather the leaf litter in which they are foraging and extract the
ants from it. This is most commonly done by placing leaf litter on a screen over a large
funnel, often under some heat. As the leaf litter dries from above, ants (and other animals)
move downward and eventually fall out the bottom and are collected in alcohol placed
below the funnel. This method works especially well in rain forests and marshy areas. A
method of improving the catch when using a funnel is to sift the leaf litter through a coarse
screen before placing it above the funnel. This will concentrate the litter and remove larger
leaves and twigs. It will also allow more litter to be sampled when using a limited number
of funnels.
The pitfall trap is another commonly used tool for collecting ants. A pitfall trap can be any
small container placed in the ground with the top level with the surrounding surface
and filled with a preservative. Ants are collected when they fall into the trap while foraging.

The diameter of the traps can vary from about 18 mm to 10 cm and the number used can
vary from a few to several hundred. The size of the traps used is influenced largely
by personal preference (although larger sizes are generally better), while the number
will be determined by the study being undertaken. The preservative used is usually
ethylene glycol or propylene glycol, as alcohol will evaporate quickly and the traps will dry
out.

One advantage of pitfall traps is that they can be used to collect over a period of time with
minimal maintenance and intervention. One disadvantage is that some species are
not collected as they either avoid the traps or do not commonly encounter them while
foraging.

Questions 1-4

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 3?

In boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
1..................... Taxonomic research involves comparing members of one group of ants.

2..................... New species of ant are frequently identified by taxonomists.

3..................... Range is the key criterion for ecological collections.

4..................... A single collection of ants can generally be used for both taxonomic and
ecological purposes.


Questions 5-10

Classify the following statements as referring to


A hand collecting

B using bait

C sampling ground litter

D using a pitfall trap


Write the correct letter, A, B, C or D, in boxes 5-10 on your answer sheet.

5..................... It is preferable to take specimens from groups of ants.

6..................... It is particularly effective for wet habitats.

7..................... It is a good method for species which are hard to find.

8..................... Little time and effort is required.

9..................... Separate containers are used for individual specimens.

10..................... Non-alcoholic preservative should be used.


Questions 11-14

Label the diagram below.
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 11-14 on your answer sheet.

11.....................

12.....................

13.....................
14.....................

Solution:

1. TRUE 8. D
2. NOT GIVEN 9. A

3. TRUE 10. D
4. FALSE 11. heat

5. A 12. leaf litter
6. C 13. screen

7. B 14. alcohol
