TITLE: Computer Provides More Questions Than Answers
INDEX: 108
============================================================

Computer Provides More Questions Than Answers

A. The island of Antikythera lies 18 miles north of Crete, where the Aegean Sea meets the
Mediterranean. Currents there can make shipping treacherous and one ship bound for
ancient Rome never made it. The ship that sank there was a giant cargo vessel measuring
nearly 500 feet long. It came to rest about 200 feet below the surface, where it stayed for
more than 2,000 years until divers looking for sponges discovered the wreck a little more
than a century ago.

B. Inside the hull were a number of bronze and marble statues. From the look of things, the
ship seemed to be carrying luxury items, probably made in various Greek islands and
bound for wealthy patrons in the growing Roman Empire. The statues were retrieved, along
with a lot of other unimportant stuff, and stored. Nine months later, an enterprising
archaeologist cleared off a layer of organic material from one of the pieces of junk and
found that it looked like a gearwheel. It had inscriptions in Greek characters and seemed to
have something to do with astronomy.

C. That piece of “Junk” went on to become the most celebrated find from the shipwreck; it
is displayed at the National Archaeological Museum of Athens. Research has shown that
the wheel was part of a device so sophisticated that its complexity would not be matched
for a thousand years — it was also the world’s first known analogue computer. The device
is so famous that an international conference organized in Athens a couple of weeks ago
had only one subject: the Antikythera Mechanism.

D. Every discovery about the device has raised new questions. Who built the device, and
for what purpose? Why did the technology behind it disappear for the next thousand years?

What does the device tell us about ancient Greek culture? And does the marvelous
construction, and the precise knowledge of the movement of the sun and moon and Earth
that it implies, tell us how the ancients grappled with ideas about determinism and human
destiny?

E. “We have gear trains from the 9th century in Baghdad used for simpler displays of the
solar and lunar motions relative to one another — they use eight gears,’ said Frangois
Charette, a historian of science in Germany who wrote an editorial accompanying a new
study of the mechanism two weeks ago in the journal Nature. “In this case, we have more
than 30 gears. To see it on a computer animation makes it mind-boggling. There is no
doubt it was a technological masterpiece.”

F. The device was probably built between 100 and 140 BC, and the understanding of
astronomy it displays seems to have been based on knowledge developed by the
Babylonians around 300-700 BC, said Mike Edmunds, a professor of astrophysics at
Cardiff University in Britain. He led a research team that reconstructed what the gear
mechanism would have looked like by using advanced three- dimensional-imaging
technology. The group also decoded a number of the inscriptions. The mechanism
explores the relationship between lunar months __ the time it takes for the moon to cycle
through its phases, say, full moon to the full moon -and calendar years. The gears had to
be cut precisely to reflect this complex relationship; 19 calendar years equal 235 lunar
months.

G. By turning the gear mechanism, which included what Edmunds called a beautiful system
of epicyclic gears that factored in the elliptical orbit of the moon, a person could check what
the sky would have looked like on a date in the past, or how it would appear in the future.
The mechanism was encased in a box with doors in front and back covered with
inscriptions — a sort of instruction manual. Inside the front door were pointers indicating
the date and the position of the sun, moon, and zodiac, while opening the back door
revealed the relationship between calendar years and lunar months, and a mechanism to
predict eclipses.

H. “If they needed to know when eclipses would occur, and this related to the rising and
setting of stars and related them to dates and religious experiences, the mechanism would
directly help,” said Yanis Bitsakis, a physicist at the University of Athens who co-wrote the
Nature paper. “It is a mechanical computer. You turn the handle and you have a date on
the front.” Building it would have been expensive and required the interaction of
astronomer, engineers, intellectuals, and craftspeople. Charette said the device overturned
conventional ideas that the ancient Greeks were primarily ivory tower thinkers who did not
deign to muddy their hands with technical stuff. It is a reminder, he said, that while the
study of history often focuses on written texts, they can tell us only a fraction of what went
on at a particular time.
I. Imagine a future historian encountering philosophy texts written in our time ~ and an
aircraft engine. The books would tell that researcher what a few scholars were thinking
today, but the engine would give them a far better window into how technology influenced
our everyday lives. Charette said it was unlikely that the device was used by practitioners
of astrology, then still in its infancy. More likely, he said, it was bound for a mantelpiece in
some rich Roman’s home. Given that astronomers of the time already knew how to
calculate the positions of the sun and the moon and to predict eclipses without the device,
it would have been the equivalent of a device built for a planetarium today __ something to
spur popular interest or at least claim bragging rights.

J. Why was the technology that went into the device lost? “The time this was built, the
jackboot of Rome was coming through,” Edmunds said. “The Romans were good at town
planning and sanitation but were not known for their interest in science.” The fact that the
device was so complex, and that it was being shipped with a number of other luxury items,
tells Edmunds that it is very unlikely to have been the one ever made. “Its sophistication is
such that it can’t have been the only one,” Edmunds said. “There must have been a
tradition of making them. We’re always hopeful a better one will surface.” Indeed, he said,
he hopes that his study and the renewed interest in the Antikythera Mechanism will prompt
second looks by both amateurs and professionals around the world. “The archaeological
world may look in their cupboards and maybe say, That isn’t a bit of rusty old metal in the
cupboard.”

Questions 1-5

The Reading Passage has ten paragraphs A-J

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter A-J, in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.


1..................... The content inside the wrecked ship
2..................... Ancient astronomers and craftsman might involve

3..................... The location of the Antikythera Mechanism

4..................... Details of how it was found

5..................... Appearance and structure of the mechanism


Questions 6-9

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage, using NO MORE
THAN TWO WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 6-9 on your answer sheet.

An ancient huge sunk 6..................... was found accidentally by sponges searcher. The
ship loaded with 7..................... such as bronze and sculptures. However, an archaeologist
found a junk similar to a 8..................... which has Greek script on it. This inspiring and
elaborated device was found to be the first 9..................... in the world


Questions 10-13

Use the information in the passage to match the people (listed A-C) with opinions or deeds
below. Write the appropriate letters A-F in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once

A Yanis Bitsakis
B Mike Edmunds
C François Charette

10..................... More complicated than the previous device
11..................... Anticipate to find more Antikythera Mechanism in the future

12..................... Antikythera Mechanism was found related to the moon

13..................... Mechanism assisted ancient people to calculate the movement of stars.

Solution:

1. B 8. gearwheel
2. H 9. analog computer

3. C 10. C
4. A 11. B

5. G 12. B
6. cargo vessel 13. A

7. luxury items
