TITLE: Decision, Decision !
INDEX: 121
============================================================

Decision, Decision !

Research explores when we can make a vital decision quickly and we need to proceed
more deliberately

A

A widely recognised legend tells us that in Gordium (in what is now Turkey) in the fourth
century BC an oxcart was roped to a pole with a complex knot. It was said that the first
person to untie it would become the king of Asia. Unfortunately, the knot proved impossible
to untie. The story continues that when confronted with this problem, rather than
deliberating on how to untie the Gordian knot. Alexander, the famous ruler of the Greeks in
the ancient world, simply took out his sword and cut it in two – then went on to conquer
Asia. Ever since the notion of a ‘Gordian solution’ has referred to the attractiveness of a
simple answer to an otherwise intractable problem.
B

Among researchers in the psychology of decision making, however, such solutions have
traditionally held little appeal. In particular, the ‘conflict model’ of decision making proposed
by psychologists Irving Janis and Leon Mann in their 1977 book, Decision Making, argued
that a complex decision-making process is essential for guarding individuals and groups
from the peril of ‘group-think’. Decisions made without thorough canvassing, surveying,
weighing, examining and reexamining relevant information and options would be
suboptimal and often disastrous. One foreign affair decision made by a well-known US
political leader in the 1960s is typically held us as an example of the perils of inadequate
thought, whereas his successful handling of a water crisis is cited as an example of the
advantages of careful deliberation. However, examination of these historical events by
Peter Suedfield, a psychologist at the University of British Columbia, and Roderick Kramer,
a psychologist at the Stanford Graduate School of Business, found little difference in the
two decision-making processes; both crises required and received complex consideration
by the political administration, but later only the second one was deemed to be the
effective.

C

In general, however, organizational and political science offers little evidence that complex
decisions fare better than simpler ones. In fact, a growing body of work suggests that in
many situations simply ‘snap’ decisions with being routinely superior to more complex ones
– an idea that gained widespread public appeal with Malcolm Gladwell’s best-selling book
Blink (2005).

D

An article by Ap Dijksterhuis of the University of Amsterdam and his colleagues, Making the
Right Choice: the Deliberation-without-attention Effect’, runs very much in the spirit of
Gladwell’s influential text. Its core argument is that to be effective, conscious (deliberative)
decision making requires cognitive resources. Because increasingly complex decisions
place increasing strain on those resources, the quality of our decisions declines as their
complexity increases. In short, complex decisions overrun our cognitive powers. On the
other hand, unconscious decision making (what the author refer to as ‘deliberation without
attention’) requires no cognitive resources, so task complexity does not Effectiveness. The
seemingly counterintuitive conclusion is that although conscious thought enhances simple
decisions, the opposite holds true for more complex decisions.

E

Dijksterhuis reports four Simple but elegant studies supporting this argument. In one,
participants assessed the quality of four hypothetical cars by considering either four
attributes (a simple task) or 12 attributes (a complex task). Among participants who
considered four attributes, those who were allowed to engage in undistracted deliberative
thought did better at discriminating between the best and worst cars. Those who were
distracted and thus unable to deliberate had to rely on their unconscious thinking and did
less well. The opposite pattern emerged when people considered 12 criteria. In this case,
conscious deliberation led to inferior discrimination and poor decisions.

F
In other studies, Dijksterhuis surveyed people shopping for clothes (‘simple’ products) and
furniture (‘complex’ products). Compared with those who said they had deliberated long
and hard, shoppers who bought with little conscious deliberation felt less happy with their
simple clothing purchase but happier with the complex furniture purchases. Deliberation
without attention actually produced better results as the decisions became more complex.

G

From there, however, the researchers take a big leap. They write: There is no reason to
assume that the deliberation-without-attention effect does not generalize to other types of
choices – political, managerial or otherwise. In such cases, it should benefit the individual
to think consciously about simple matters and to delegate thinking about more complicated
matters to the unconscious.

H

This radical inference contradicts standard political and managerial theory but doubtless
comforts those in politics and management who always find the simple solution to the
complex problem an attractive proposition. Indeed, one suspects many of our political
leaders already embrace this wisdom.

I

Still, it is there, in the realms of society and its governance, that the more problematic
implications of deliberation without attention begin to surface. Variables that can be neatly
circumscribed in decisions about shopping lose clarity in a world of group dynamics, social
interaction, history and politics. Two pertinent questions arise. First, what counts as a
complex decision? And second, what counts as a good outcome?

J

As social psychologist Kurt Lewin (1890 – 1947) noted, a ‘good’ decision that nobody
respects is actually bad, his classic studies of decision making showed that participating in
deliberative processes makes people more likely to abide by the results. The issue here is
that when political decision-makers make mistakes, it is their politics, or the relationship
between their politics and our own, rather than psychology which is at fault.
K

Gladwell’s book and Dijksterhuis’s paper are invaluable in pointing out the limitations of the
conventional wisdom that decision quality rises with decision-making complexity. But this
work still tempts us to believe that decision making is simply a matter of psychology, rather
than also a question of politics, ideology and group membership. Avoiding social
considerations in a search for general appeal rather than toward it.

Questions 1-5

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write your answers in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.


1. The legend of the Gordian knot is used to illustrate the idea that

A anyone can solve a difficult problem
B difficult problems can have easy solutions

C the solution to any problem requires a lot of thought

D people who can solve complex problems make good leaders


2. The ‘conflict model’ of decision making proposed by Janis and Mann requires that

A opposing political parties be involved

B all-important facts be considered

C people be encouraged to have different ideas
D previous similar situations be thoroughly examined


3. According to recent thinking reinforced by Malcolm Gladwell, the best decisions

A involve consultation

B involve complex thought

C are made very quickly

D are the most attractive option


4.Dijksterhuis and his colleagues claim in their article that

A our cognitive resources improve as tasks become more complex

B conscious decision making is negatively affected by task complexity

C unconscious decision making is a popular approach

D deliberation without attention defines the way we make decisions


5. Dijksterhuis’s car study found that, in simple tasks, participants
A were involved in lengthy discussions

B found it impossible to make decisions quickly

C were unable to differentiate between the options

D could make a better choice when allowed to concentrate


Questions 6-9

Complete the summary using the list of words A-I below.

Write the correct letter, A-I, in boxes 6-9 on your answer sheet.

Dijksterhuis’s shopping study and its conclusions
Using clothing and furniture as examples of different types of purchases, Dijksterhuis
questioned shoppers on their satisfaction with what they had bought. People who
spent 6..................... time buying simple clothing items were more satisfied than those who
had not. However, when buying furniture, shoppers made 7..................... purchasing
decisions if they didn’t think too hard. From this, the researchers concluded that in other
choices, perhaps more important than shopping. 8..................... decisions are best made
by the unconscious. The writer comments that Dijksterhuis’s finding is
apparently 9..................... but nonetheless true.

A more B counterintuitive C simple

D better E conscious F obvious

G complex H less I worse


Questions 10-14

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage?

In boxes 10-14 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement agrees with the views of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the views of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
10..................... Dijksterhuis’s findings agree with existing political and management
theories.
11..................... Some political leaders seem to use deliberation without attention when
making complex decisions.
12..................... All political decisions are complex ones.

13..................... We judge political errors according to our own political beliefs.

14..................... Social considerations must be taken into account for any examination of
decision making to prove useful.

Solution:

1. B 8. G
2. B 9. B

3. C 10. NO
4. B 11. NOT GIVEN

5. D 12. NOT GIVEN
6. A 13. YES

7. D 14. NOT GIVEN
