TITLE: Detection of a meteorite Lake
INDEX: 128
============================================================

Detection of a meteorite Lake

A

As the sun rose over picturesque Lake Bosumtwi, a team of Syracuse University
researchers prepared for another day of using state-of-the-art equipment to help bottom.
Nestled in the heart of Ghana, the lake holds an untapped reservoir of information that
could help scientists predict future climate changes by looking at evidence from the past.
This information will also improve the scientists’ understanding of the changes that occur in
a region struck by a massive meteorite.

B

The project, led by earth sciences professor Christopher Scholz of the College of Arts and
Sciences and funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF), is the first large-scale
effort to study Lake Bosumtwi, which formed 1.1 million years ago when a giant meteor
crashed into the Earth’s surface. The resulting crater is one of the largest and most well-
preserved geologically young craters in the world, says Scholz, who is collaborating on the
project with researchers from the University of Arizona, the University of South Carolina,
the University of Rhode Island, and several Ghanaian institutions. “Our data should provide
information about what happens when an impact hits hard, pre-Cambrian, crystalline rocks
that are a billion years old,” he says.

C

Equally important is the fact that the lake, which is about 8 kilometers in diameter, has no
natural outlet. The rim of the crater rises about 250 meters above the water’s surface.
Streams flow into the lake, Scholz says, but the water leaves only by evaporation, or by
seeping through the lake sediments. For the past million years, the lake has acted as a
tropical rain gauge, filling and drying with changes in precipitation and the tropical climate.
The record of those changes is hidden in the sediment below the lake bottom. “The lake is
one of the best sites in the world for the study of tropical climate changes,” Scholz says.
“The tropics are the heat engine for the Earth’s climate. To understand the global climate,
we need to have records of climate changes from many sites around the world, including
the tropics.”

D
Before the researchers could explore the lake’s subsurface, they needed a boat with a
large, working deck area that could carry eight tons of scientific equipment. The boat –
dubbed R/V Kilindi – was built in Florida last year. It was constructed in modules that were
dismantled, packed inside a shipping container, and reassembled over a 10-day period in
late November and early December 1999 in the rural village of Abono, Ghana. The
research team then spent the next two weeks testing the boat and equipment before
returning to the United States for the holidays.

E

In mid-January, five members of the team – Keely Brooks, an earth sciences graduate
student; Peter Cattaneo, a research analyst; and Kiram Lezzar, a postdoctoral scholar, all
from SU; James McGill, a geophysical field engineer; and Nick Peters, a Ph.D. student in
geophysics from the University of Miami – returned to Abono to begin collecting data about
the lake’s subsurface using a technique called seismic reflection profiling. In this process, a
high-pressure air gun is used to create small, pneumatic explosions in the water. The
sound energy penetrates about 1,000 to 2,000 meters into the lake’s subsurface before
bouncing back to the surface of the water.

F

The reflected sound energy is detected by underwater microphones – called hydrophones
– embedded in a 50-meter-long cable that is towed behind the boat as it crosses the lake in
a carefully designed grid pattern. On-board computers record the signals, and the resulting
data are then processed and analyzed in the laboratory. “The results will give us a good
idea of the shape of the basin, how thick the layers of sediment are, and when and where
there were major changes in sediment accumulation,” Scholz says. “We are now
developing a three-dimensional perspective of the lake’s subsurface and the layers of
sediment that have been laid down.”

G

Team members spent about four weeks in Ghana collecting the data. They worked seven
days a week, arriving at the lake just after sunrise. On a good day, when everything went
as planned, the team could collect data and be back at the dock by early afternoon. Except
for a few relatively minor adjustments, the equipment and the boat worked well. Problems
that arose were primarily non-scientific – tree stumps, fishing nets, cultural barriers, and
occasional misunderstandings with local villagers.

H

Lake Bosumtwi, the largest natural freshwater lake in the country, is sacred to the Ashanti
people, who believe their souls come to the lake to bid farewell to their god. The lake is
also the primary source of fish for the 26 surrounding villages. Conventional canoes and
boats are forbidden. Fishermen travel on the lake by floating on traditional planks they
propel with small paddles. Before the research project could begin, Scholz and his

Ghanaian counterparts had to secure special permission from tribal chiefs to put the R/V
Kilindi on the lake.

I
When the team began gathering data, rumors flew around the lake as to why the
researchers were there. “Some thought we were dredging the lake for gold, others thought
we were going to drain the lake or that we had bought the lake,” Cattaneo says. “But once
the local people understood why we were there, they were very helpful.”

Questions 1-5

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?

In boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement is true

FALSE if the statement is false

NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage


1..................... With the investigation of the lake, the scientist may predict the climate
changes in the future.


2..................... The crater resulted from a meteorite impact is the largest and most
preserved one in the world.

3..................... The water stored in lake Bosumtwi was gone only by seeping through the
lake sediments.

4..................... Historical climate changes can be detected by the analysis of the sediment
in the lake.

5..................... The greatest obstacle to the research of scientists had been the
interference by the locals due to their indigenous believes.


Questions 6-9

There are three steps of collecting data from the lake as followings, please fill the blanks in
the Flow Chart below:
6.....................

7.....................

8.....................

9.....................


Questions 10-14

Complete the following summary of the paragraph of Reading Passage.

Using NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 10-14 on your answer sheet.


The boat-double R/V Kilindi crossed the lake was dismantled and stored in
a 10...................... The technology they used called 11.....................; They created sound
energy into 1000-2000 metres into the bottom of the lake and used separate equipment to
collect the returned waves. Then the data had been analyzed and processed in
the 12..................... Scholz also added that they were now building 13...................... View
of the sediment or sub-image in the bottom of the lake. The whole set of equipment works
well yet the ship should avoid physical barrier including tree stumps or 14......................
Floating on the surface of the lake.

Solution:

1. TRUE 8. cable
9. hydrophones/
2. NOT GIVEN underwater
microphones

3. FALSE 10. shipping container

11. seismic reflection
4. TRUE
profiling
5. FALSE 12. laboratory
6. air gun 13. three-dimensional
7. sound energy/
14. fishing nets
sound wave
