TITLE: Development of Public management theory
INDEX: 131
============================================================

Development of Public management theory

Bureaucracy management: The classic one

{A} Several theories bridged the gap between strictly private and public sector
management. One good example is Max Weber exploring sociologist, who explored the
ideal bureaucracy in The Protestant ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Bureaucratic Theory
was developed by a German. Sociologist and political economist Max Weber (1864-1920).
According to him, bureaucracy is the most efficient form of organization. The organization
has a well-defined line of authority. It has clear rules and regulations which are strictly
followed. according to Max Weber, there are three types of power in an organization: 1.
Traditional Power, 2. Charismatic power, and 3. Bureaucratic Power or Legal Power.

The Characteristics or Features of Bureaucracy Organisation

{B} Weber admired Bureaucracy for its trustworthiness. The Bureaucracy was constituted
by a group of professional, ethical public officials. These servants dedicate themselves to
the public in return for the security of job tenure among the many advantages of public
employment. There is a high degree of division of Labour and specialization as well as a
defined Hierarchy of authority. There are well-defined rules and regulations that follow the
principle of Rationality, Objectively, and Consistency. These rules cover all the duties and
rights of the employees. These rules must be strictly followed. Impersonal relations among
the member of the organization. Interpersonal relations are based on positions and not on
personalities


{C} Bureaucracy organization is a very rigid type of organization. Too much emphasis on
rules and regulations which are rigid and inflexible. It does not give importance to human
relations. No importance is also given to informal groups which nowadays play an
important role in all business organizations. Yet, too much importance is given to the
technical qualifications of the employees for promotion and transfers. The dedication and
commitment of the employee are not considered. It is suitable
for government organizations. It is also suitable for organizations where change is very
slow. There will be unnecessary delays in decision-making due to formalities and rules. It is
appropriate for static organizations. There is difficulty in coordination and communication.
{D} Herbal Simon, Chester Barnard, and Charles Lindblom are among the first of those
recognized as early American public administrators. These men ushered in an era during
which the field gained recognition as independent and unique, despite its multidisciplinary
nature. Simon contributed theoretical separation to discern management, decisions based
on values. since one cannot make completely responsible decisions with public resources
based solely on personal values, one must attempt to upon objectively determined facts.
Simon developed other relevant theories as well. Similar to Lindblom’s subsequently
discussed critique of comprehensive rationality, Simon also taught that a strictly economic
man, one who maximizes returns or values by making decisions based upon complete
information in unlimited time, is unrealistic. Instead, most public administrators use a
sufficient amount of information to make a satisfactory decision: they” satisfice.”

{E} In decision-making, Simon believed that agents face uncertainty about the future and
costs in acquiring information in the present. These factors limit the extent to which agents
can make a fully rational decision, thus they possess only” bounded rationality” and must
make deci9sion by “Satisficing,” or choosing that which might not be optional but which will
make them happy enough. ” Rational behavior, in economics, means that individuals
maximize their utility function. Under the constraints they face (e.g. their budget constraint,
limited choices,…..) in pursuit of their self-interest.


{F} Chester Barnard was also one of the watershed scholars. Barnard published “The
Economy of Incentives”(1938), in an attempt to explain individual participation in an
organization. Barnard explained organizations as systems of exchange. Low-level
employees must have more incentive to remain with the organization for which they
exchange their labor and loyalty. The organization (and higher-level employees) must
derive sufficient benefit from its employees to keep them, The net pull of the organization is
determined by material rewards, environmental conditions, and other intangibles like
recognition. He gives great importance to persuasion much more than to economic
incentives. He described four general and four specific incentives including Money and
other material inducements; Personal non-material opportunities for distinction;
DESIREABLE PHYSICal conditions of work; Ideal benefactions, such as pride of
workmanship, etc.

A New Humanist Era: Rethinking Power and Management

{G} Humanists embrace a dynamic concept of employee and management techniques.
This requires a theoretical shift away from the idea that an employee is a cog in the
industrial machine. Rather, employees are unique individuals with goals, needs desires,
etc.

{H} The humanist era ushered in other possible interpretations of such topics as power and
management. One of the most significant was Douglas McGregor’s “Theory X and
TheoryY. ” McGregor’s work provided a basis for a management framework, a structure
upon whose rungs the classic and new-age management might be hung. first, commonly
held by early management theorists, Theory X begins with the assumption that humans
possess an inherent aversion to work. Employees must therefore be coerced and
controlled if management expects to see results. Further, lazy humans prefer direction
bordering micromanagement whenever possible.


{I} Theory Y is much more compatible with the humanist tradition. This begins with the
assumption that work is as natural for humans as rest or play. Further, employees will
direct and control themselves as they complete objectives. Humans learn naturally and
seek responsibility. Consequently, managers need only to steer employees in a
cooperative manner toward goals that serve the organization. There is room for many to
create and share power.

{J} The Z- Organization can be thought of as a complimentary third element to McGregor’s
dichotomy. Z- organizations are Japanese organizations that are a Japanese
organizational model. Similar to Theory Y management, Z organizations place a large
degree of responsibility upon the employees. Further, relatively low-level employees are
entrusted with the freedom to be creative, ” wander around the organization” and become
truly unique, company-specific employees. However, employees achieve only after
“agreeing on a central set of objectives and ways of doing business” In Z Organizations,
decision-making is democratic and participatory. Despite the many ADVANTAGES OF
THIS ORGANIZATIONAL MODEL, THERE ARE SEVERAL DRAW-BACKS. THESE
INCLUDE THE DEPREDATION OF A LARGE PROFESSIONAL DIstance-de
personalization is impossible in Z-organizations. Since, in reality, there is a high percentage
of workers who would like to work for the financial return than the job objectives. A high
level of self-discipline is also necessary.
QUESTIONS 1-2

Choose Two appropriate letters and fill in boxes 1-2

What are the features and advantages of Bureaucratic Management?

A There are equal opportunities coming from little hierarchy of authority among companies

B employees‘ promotion can be much fairer which is based on job duties not on characters

C employees enjoy a greater freedom of duties than their strict right
D selection and Promotion is based on mastery of new technology

E these employees can dedicate themselves to the public for stability of a long term job


QUESTIONS 3-4

Choose Two appropriate letters and fill in boxes 3-4

What are the limitations for the ideas of Bureaucratic Management?

A commitment of the employee is not taken into consideration enough

B there is difficulty in decision-making based on formalities and rules

C employees are casually organized as no importance is given to formal groups

D There is difficulty in enforcement of rules and regulations

E it is not applicable to dynamic organizations where change is very fast


QUESTIONS 5-6

Choose Two appropriate letters and fill in boxes 5-6

What are the aims of management as Douglas McGregor’s work of the “Theory Y”

A employees must be coerced and controlled if management expect to see results
B employees has natural tendency for rest or play

C humans will not automatically seek responsibility

D managers may guide employees in a cooperative manner toward objectives

E there is little room for manager to designate or share his power


QUESTIONS 7-8

Choose Two appropriate letters and fill in boxes 7-8
What are the limitations for the “Theory Z”

A decision-making is democratic and participatory

B organization mode has inherent design fault

C not all employee set higher interest in the job than that of wages

D personalization remains un-eliminated in organizations
E self-discipline is an unnecessary quality


QUESTIONS 9-13

Use the information in the passage to match the people (listed A-E) with opinions or deeds
below. Write the appropriate letters A-E in boxes 9-13 on your answer sheet

NB Some people may match more than one ideas
A. Mark Weber

B. McGregor

C. Herbert Simon

D. Chester Barnard

E. Charles Lindblom

9..................... Employees like to follow professional, ethical public officials to secure a job

10..................... Highly effective can be achieved only after agreeing on a core of objectives
and method of doing things

11..................... Managers need to take the employees‘ emotional feeling, besides the
material rewards, into incentives system.

12..................... Individuals can maximize their self-interest when all the budget and
choices are utilized well

13..................... The assumption that humans possess a natural dislike to work who ought
to be forced and controlled

Solution:

1. B 8. D
2. E 9. A

3. A 10. B
4. E 11. D

5. B 12. C
6. D 13. B

7. C
