TITLE: Digital diet
INDEX: 132
============================================================

Digital diet

{A} Telecommuting, Internet shopping and online meetings may save energy as compared
with in-person alternatives, but as the digital age moves on, its green reputation is turning a
lot browner. E-mailing, number crunching and Web searches in the U.S. consumed as
much as 61 billion kilowatt-hours last year, or 1.5 per cent of the nation’s electricity-half of
which comes from coal. In 2005 the computers of the world ate up 123 billion kilowatt-hours
of energy, a number that will double by 2010 if present trends continue, according to

Jonathan Koomey, a staff scientist at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. As a result,
the power bill to run a computer over its lifetime will surpass the cost of buying the machine
in the first place giving Internet and computer companies a business reason to cut energy
costs, as well as an environmental one.


{B} One of the biggest energy sinks comes not from the computers themselves but from
the air-conditioning needed to keep them from overheating. For every kilowatt-hour of
energy used for computing in a data centre, another kilowatt-hour is required to cool the
furnace-like racks of servers.

{C} For Internet giant Google, this reality has driven efforts such as the installation of a
solar array that can provide 30 per cent of the peak power needs of its Mountain View,
Calif., headquarters as well as increased purchases of renewable energy. But to deliver

Web pages within seconds, the firm must maintain hundreds of thousands of computer
servers in cavernous buildings. “It’s a good thing to worry about server energy efficiency,”
remarks Google’s green energy czar Bill Weihl. “We are actively working to maximize the
efficiency of our data centres, which account for most of the energy Google consumes
worldwide.” Google will funnel some of its profits into a new effort, dubbed RE<C (for
renewable energy cheaper than coal, as Google translates it) to make sources such as
solar-thermal, high-altitude wind and geothermal cheaper than coal “within years, not
decades, according to Weihl. .

{D} In the meantime, the industry as a whole has employed a few tricks to save watts.
Efforts include cutting down on the number of transformations the electricity itself must
undergo before achieving the correct operating voltage; rearranging the stacks of servers
and the mechanics of their cooling; and using software to create multiple “virtual”
computers, rather than having to deploy several real ones. Such virtualization has allowed
computer maker Hewlett-Packard to consolidate 86 data centers spread throughout the
world to just three, with three backups, says Pat Tiernan, the firm’s vice president of social
and environmental responsibility.


{E} The industry is also tackling the energy issue at the computer-chip level. With every
doubling of processing power in recent years has come a doubling in power consumption.
But to save energy, chipmakers such as Intel and AMD have shifted to so-called multicore
technology, which packs multiple processors into one circuit rather than separating them.

“When we moved to multicore-away from a linear focus on megahertz and gigahertz—and
throttled down microprocessors, the energy savings were pretty substantial,” says Allyson
Klein, Intel’s marketing manager for its Ecotech Initiative. Chipmakers continue to shrink
circuits on the nanoscale as well, which means a chip needs less electricity” to deliver the
same performance, she adds.

{F} With such chips, more personal computers will meet various efficiency standards, such
as Energy Star compliance (which mandates that a desktop consume no more than 65
watts). The federal government, led by agencies such as NASA and the Department of
Defense may soon require all their purchases to meet the Electronic Product
Environmental Assessment Tool standard. And Google, Intel and others have formed the
Climate Savers Computing Initiative, an effort to cut power consumption from all computers
by 50 per cent by 2010.


{G} Sleep modes and other power management tools built into most operating systems can
offer savings today. Yet about 90 per cent of computers do not have such settings enabled,
according to Klein. Properly activated, they would prevent a computer from leading to the
emission of thousands of kilograms of carbon dioxide from power plants every year. But if
powering down or unplugging the computer (the only way it uses zero power) is not an
option, then perhaps the most environmentally friendly use of all those wasted
computing cycles is in helping to model climate change. The University of Oxford’s
ClimatePrediction.net offers an opportunity to at least predict the consequences of all that
coal burning.
{H} CO2 Stats is a free tool that can be embedded into any Website to calculate the
carbon dioxide emissions associated with using it. That estimate is based on an
assumption of 300 watts of power consumed by the personal computer, network and server
involved- or 16.5 milligrams of CO2 emitted every second of use. “The typical carbon
footprint is roughly equivalent to 1.5 people breathing,” says physicist Alexander Wissner-
Gross of Harvard University, who co-created the Web tool.

Questions 1-6

Use the information in the passage to match the people (listed A-E) with opinions or
deeds below. Write the appropriate letters A-E in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.


NB you may use any letter more than once

(A) Jonathan Koomey
(B) Allyson Klein

(C) Pat Tiernan

(D) Bill Weihl

(E) Alexander Wissner-Gross


1..................... Figuring ways to optimize the utilization of energy in certain significant
departments in the company

2..................... A revolutionary improvement in a tiny but quite imperative component of the
computers


3..................... Targeting at developing alternative sources within the near future

4..................... An astounding estimate on the energy to be consumed by computers in a
short period based on an unchangeable trend


5..................... A powerful technique developed for integration of resources

6..................... A failure for the vast majority of computers to activate the use of some
internal tools already available in them


Questions 7-10

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?
In boxes 7-10 on your answer sheet, write

True if the statement is true
False if the statement is false
NOT GIVENif there is no information about this in the passage
7..................... To chill the server does not take up the considerable amount of energy
needed for the computer.


8..................... It seems that the number of servers has a severe impact on the speed of
the internet connection.
9..................... Several companies from other fields have a joint effort with the internet
industry to work on ways to save energy.

10..................... Actions taken at a governmental level are to be expected to help with
savings in energy in the near future.


Questions 11-14

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage, using No
More than three words from the Reading Passage for each answer. Write your
answers in boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet.
The 11..................... has also been reached to save up energy in every possible way and
the philosophy behind it lies in the fact that there is a positive correlation between the ability
to process and the need for energy. In this context, some firms have switched to
12..................... which means several processors are integrated into one single circuit to
make significant energy savings. What is more, they go on to 13..................... on an even
more delicate level for the chips to save more energy while staying at the constant level in
terms of the 14......................

Solution:

1. D 8. TRUE
2. B 9. NOT GIVEN

3. D 10. TRUE
11. COMPUTER-CHIP
4. A
LEVEL
12. SO-CALLED
5. C
MULTICORE TECHNOLOGY
6. B 13. SHRINK CIRCUITS
7. FALSE 14. PERFORMANCE
