TITLE: Dirty River But Clean Water
INDEX: 135
============================================================

Dirty River But Clean Water

Floods can occur in rivers when the flow rate exceeds the capacity of the river channel,
particularly at bends or meanders in the waterway. Floods often cause damage to homes
and businesses if they are in the natural flood plains of rivers. While riverine flood damage
can be eliminated by moving away from rivers and other bodies of water, people
have traditionally lived and worked by rivers because the land is usually flat and fertile and
because rivers provide easy travel and access to commerce and industry.

A Fire and flood are two of humanity’s worst nightmares. People have,therefore,always
sought to control them. Forest fires are snuffed out quickly. The flow of rivers is regulated
by weirs and dams. At least, that is how it used to be. But foresters have learned that
forests need fires to clear out the brash and even to get seeds to germinate. And a similar
revelation is now – dawning on hydrologists. Rivers – and the ecosystems they support –
need floods. That is why a man-made torrent has been surging down the Grand Canyon.
By Thursday March 6th it was running at full throttle, which was expected to be sustained
for 60 hours.

B Floods once raged through the canyon every year. Spring Snow from as far away as
Wyoming would melt and swell the Colorado river to a flow that averaged around 1,500
cubic metres (50,000 cubic feet) a second. Every eight years or so, that figure rose to
almost 3,000 cubic metres. These floods infused the river with sediment, carved its
beaches and built its sandbars.

C However, in the four decades since the building of the Glen Canyon dam, just upstream
of the Grand Canyon, the only sediment that it has collected has come from tiny,
undammed tributaries. Even that has not been much use as those tributaries are not
powerful enough to distribute the sediment in an ecologically valuable way.
D This lack of flooding has harmed local wildlife. The humpback chub,for example, thrived
in the rust-redwaters of the Colorado. Recently, though, its population has crashed. At first
sight, it looked as if the reason was that the chub were being eaten by trout introduced for
sport fishing in the mid-20th century. But trout and chub co-existed until the Glen Canyon
dam was built, so something else is going on. Steve Gloss, of the United States’ Geological
Survey (USGS), reckons that the chub’s decline is the result of their losing their most
valuable natural defense, the Colorado’s rusty sediment. The chub were well adapted to
the poor visibility created by the thick, red water which gave the river its name, and
depended on it to hide from predators. Without the cloudy water the chub became
vulnerable.

E And the chub are not alone. In the years since the Glen Canyon dam was built, several
species have vanished altogether. These include the Colorado pike-minnow, the razorback
sucker and the round-tail chub. Meanwhile, aliens including fathead minnows, channel
catfish and common carp, which would have been hard, put to survive in the savage waters
of the undammed canyon, have move din.

F So flooding is the obvious answer. Unfortunately, it is easier said than done. Floods
were sent down the Grand Canyon in 1996 and 2004 and the results were mixed. In 1996
the flood was allowed to go on too long. To start with,all seemed well. The floodwaters built
up sandbanks and infused the river with sediment. Eventually, however, the continued flow
washed most of the sediment out of the canyon. This problem was avoided in 2004, but
unfortunately, on that occasion, the volume of sand available behind the dam was too low
to rebuild the sandbanks. This time, the USGS is convinced that things will be better. The
amount of sediment available is three times greater than it was in 2004. So if a flood is
going to do some good, this is the time to unleash one.

G Even so, it may turn out to be an empty gesture. At less than 1,200 cubic metres a
second, this flood is smaller than even an average spring flood, let alone one of the
mightier deluges of the past. Those glorious inundations moved massive quantities of
sediment through the Grand Canyon,wiping the slate dirty, and making a muddy mess of
silt and muck that would make modern river rafters cringe.

Questions 1-7

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?

In boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet, write
TRUE if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this

1..................... Damage caused by fire is worse than that caused by flood.

2..................... The flood peaks at almost 1500 cubic meters every eight years.

3..................... Contribution of sediments delivered by tributaries has little impact.
4..................... Decreasing number of chubs is always caused by introducing of trout since
mid 20th century.
5..................... It seemed that the artificial flood in 1996 had achieved success partly at the
very beginning.
6..................... In fact, the yield of artificial flood water is smaller than an average natural
flood at present.
7..................... Mighty floods drove fast moving flows with clean and high quality water.


Questions 8-13

Complete the summary below.
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 8-13 on your answer sheet.

The eco-impact of the Canyon Dam


Floods are people’s nightmare. In the past, canyon was raged by flood every year. The
snow from far Wyoming would melt in the season of 8..................... and caused a flood flow
peak in Colorado river. In the four decades after people built the Glen Canyon dam, it only
could gather 9..................... together from tiny, undammed tributaries.

Humpback chub population on reduced, why?

Then, several species disappeared including Colorado pike-minnow, 10..................... and
the round-tail chub. Meanwhile, some moved in such as fathead minnows, channel catfish
and 11...................... The non-stopped flow leaded to the washing away of the sediment
out of the canyon, which poses great threat to the chubs because it has
poor 12..................... away from predators. In addition, the volume of 13.....................
available behind the dam was too low to rebuild the bars and flooding became more
serious.

Solution:

1. NOT GIVEN 8. spring
2. FALSE 9. sediment

3. TRUE 10. razorback sucker
4. FALSE 11. common carp

5. TRUE 12. visibility
6. TRUE 13. sand

7. NOT GIVEN
