TITLE: Education Philosophy
INDEX: 145
============================================================

Education Philosophy

A

Although we lack accurate statistics about child mortality in the pre-industrial period, we do
have evidence that in the 1660s, the mortality rate for children who died within 14 days of
birth was as much as 30 per cent. Nearly all families suffered some premature death. Since
all parents expected to bury some of their children, they found it difficult to invest in their
newborn children. Moreover, to protect themselves from the emotional consequences of
children’s death, parents avoided making any emotional commitment to an infant. It is no
wonder that we find mothers leave their babies in gutters or refer to the death in the same
paragraph with reference to pickles.
B

The 18th century witnessed the transformation from an agrarian economy to an industrial
one, one of the vital social changes taking place in the Western world. An increasing
number of people moved from their villages and small towns to big cities where life was
quite different. Social supports which had previously existed in smaller communities were
replaced by ruthless problems such as poverty, crime, substandard housing and disease.
Due to the need for additional income to support the family, young children from the
poorest families were forced into early employment and thus their childhood became
painfully short. Children as young as 7 might be required to work full-time, subjected to
unpleasant and unhealthy circumstances, from factories to prostitution. Although such a
role has disappeared in most wealthy countries, the practice of childhood employment still
remains a staple in underdeveloped countries and rarely disappeared entirely.

C

The lives of children underwent a drastic change during the 1800s in the United States.
Previously, children from both rural and urban families were expected to participate in
everyday labour due to the bulk of manual hard working. Nevertheless, thanks to the
technological advances of the mid-1800s, coupled with the rise of the middle class and
redefinition of roles of family members, work and home became less synonymous over
time. People began to purchase toys and books for their children. When the country
depended more upon machines, children in rural and urban areas, were less likely to be
required to work at home. Beginning from the Industrial Revolution and rising slowly over
the course of the 19th century, this trend increased exponentially after civil war. John
Locke, one of the most influential writers of his period, created the first clear and
comprehensive statement of the ‘environmental position’ that family education determines
a child’s life, and via this, he became the father of modem learning theory. During the
colonial period, his teachings about child care gained a lot of recognition in America.

D

According to Jean Jacques Rousseau, who lived in an era of the American and French
Revolution, people were ‘noble savages’ in the original state of nature, meaning they are
innocent, free and uncorrupted. In 1762, Rousseau wrote a famous novel Emile to convey
his educational philosophy through a story of a boy’s education from infancy to adult-hood.
This work was based on his extensive observation of children and adolescents, their
individuality, his developmental theory and on the memories of his own childhood. He
contrasts children with adults and describes their age-specific characteristics in terms of
historical perspective and developmental psychology. Johan Heinrich Pestalozzi, living
during the early stages of the Industrial Revolution, sought to develop schools to nurture
children’s all-round development. He agreed with Rousseau that humans are naturally
good but were spoiled by a corrupt society. His approach to teaching consists of the
general and special methods, and his theory was based upon establishing an emotionally
healthy homelike learning environment, which had to be in place before more specific
instructions occurred.

E

One of the best-documented cases of Pestalozzi’s theory concerned a so-called feral child
named Victor, who was captured in a small town in the south of France in 1800.
Prepubescent, mute, naked, and perhaps 11 or 12 years old, Victor had been seen
foraging for food in the gardens of the locals in the area and sometimes accepted people’s
direct offers of food before his final capture. Eventually, he was brought to Paris and
expected to answer some profound questions about the nature of human, but that goal was
quashed very soon. A young physician Jean Marc Gaspard Itard was optimistic about the
future of Victor and initiated a five-year education plan to civilise him and teach him to
speak. With a subsidy from the government, Itard recruited a local woman Madame Guerin
to assist him to provide a semblance of a home for Victor, and he spent an enormous
amount of time and effort working with Victor. Itard’s goal to teach Victor the basics of
speech could never be fully achieved, but Victor had learnt some elementary forms of
communication.

F

Although other educators were beginning to recognise the simple truth embedded in
Rousseau’s philosophy, it is not enough to identify the stages of children’s development
alone. There must be certain education which had to be geared towards those stages. One
of the early examples was the invention of kindergarten, which was a word and a
movement created by a German-born educator, Friedrich Froebel in 1840. Froebel placed
a high value on the importance of play in children’s learning. His invention would spread
around the world eventually in a verity of forms. Froebel’s ideas were inspired through his
cooperation with Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi. Froebel didn’t introduce the notion of
kindergarten until 58 years old, and he had been a teacher for four decades. The notion
was a haven and a preparation for children who were about to enter the regimented
educational system. The use of guided or structured play was a cornerstone of his
kindergarten education because he believed that play was the most significant aspect of
development at this time of life. Play served as a mechanism for a child to grow emotionally
and to achieve a sense of self-worth. Meanwhile, teachers served to organise materials
and a structured environment in which each child, as an individual, could achieve these
goals. When Froebel died in 1852, dozens of kindergartens had been created in Germany.
Kindergartens began to increase in Europe, and the movement eventually reached and
flourished in the United States in the 20th century.

Questions 1-4

Reading Passage 1 has six paragraphs, A-F.
Choose the correct heading for paragraphs A and C-E from the list of headings below.
Write the correct number, i-vii, in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.

List of Headings
i The inheritance and development of educational concepts of different thinkers
ii Why children had to work to alleviate the burden on family
iii Why children are not highly valued
iv The explanation for children dying in hospital at their early age
v The first appearance of modem educational philosophy
vi The application of a creative learning method on a wild kid
vii The emergence and spread of the notion of kindergarten


1..................... Paragraph A

Example Answer
Paragraph B ii

2..................... Paragraph C

3..................... Paragraph D

4..................... Paragraph E


Questions 5-8

Look at the following events (Questions 5-8) and the list of dates below.
Match each event with the correct date, A, B or C.
Write the correct letter, A, B or C, in boxes 5-8 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.

List of Dates

A the 18th century (1700-1799)
B the 19th century (1800-1899)
C the 20th century (1900-1999)


5..................... the need for children to work

6..................... the rise of the middle class

7..................... the emergence of a kindergarten

8..................... the spread of kindergartens around the U.S.

Questions 9-13

Look at the following opinions or deeds (Questions 9-13) and the list of people below.
Match each opinion or deed with the correct person, A, B, C or D.
Write the correct letter, A, B, C or D, in boxes 9-13 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.

List of People

A Jean Jacques Rousseau
B Johan Heinrich Pestalozzi
C Jean Marc Gaspard Itard
D Friedrich Froebel


9..................... was not successful to prove the theory

10..................... observed a child’s record

11..................... requested a study setting with emotional comfort firstly

12..................... proposed that corruption was not a characteristic in people’s nature
13..................... was responsible for an increase in the number of a type of school

Solution:

1. iii 8. C
2. v 9. C

3. i 10. A
4. vi 11. B

5. A 12. A
6. B 13. D

7. B
