TITLE: EFFORT AND SCIENCE TO WIN
INDEX: 147
============================================================

EFFORT AND SCIENCE TO WIN

Winning nowadays is not only a question of disciplined training: The triumph of victory
today involves the collaboration of several medical specialists who combine their particular
knowledge in an effort to help each athlete to reach their potential.

A. In Mexico, the Medicine Direction and .Applied Sciences of the National Commission of
Deporte analyses all aspects of sports science from the role of the auditory system in
sporting achievement to die power of the mind and its role in the ability to win. Everything, it
seems, is open to scrutiny. Recently, the focus has been evaluating the visual acuity of
cyclists and long distance runners but they also focus on the more traditional areas of
sports research, among them psychology, nutrition, anthropology, biochemistry and
odontology1. From budding child athletes as young as 9 to the more mature-aged
sportsperson, the facility at Deporte has attracted some of Mexico’s most famous sporting
and Olympic hopefuls.

B. “The study of elite athletes is now more scientific than ever” says doctor Francisco
Javier Squares, “after each competition, athletes are exposed to vigorous medical
examinations and follow-up training in order to help US arrive at a program that is tailor-
made. “The modern athlete has become big business, no longer is there a one-size-fits-all
approach. For example, in the past two people both 1.70 meters tall and weighing 70
kilograms would have been given the same program of athletic conditioning – now this idea
is obsolete. It may be that the first individual has 35 kgs of muscle and 15 kgs of fat and the
other person, although the same height and weight may have 30 kgs of muscle and 20 kgs
of fat. Through detailed scientific evaluation here at our facility in Deporte,” says Squares,
“… we are able to construct a very specific training programme for each individual.”

C. Whereas many countries in die world focus on the elevation of the glorious champion,
the Mexican Olympic team takes a slightly different approach. Psychologically speaking an
athlete must bring to his endeavour a healthy dose of humility. As Squares said, “When an
athlete wins for Mexico, it is always as a result of a combined team effort with many people
operating behind the scenes to realise the sporting achievement. When an athlete stands
on the dais, it is because of great effort on the part of many.”

D. As is often the case in some poorer countries, sportsmen and women are stifled in their
development due to budgetary constraints. However this has not been a factor for
consideration with the team in Mexico. The Mexican government has allocated a
substantial sum of money for the provision of the latest equipment and laboratories for
sports research. In fact, the quality of Mexico’s facilities puts them on a par with countries
like Italy and Germany in terms of access to resources. One example of sophisticated
equipment used at the Mexican facility is the hyperbaric chamber. This apparatus is used
to enhance oxygen recovery after a vigorous physical workout. Says Squares, “When you
breathe the air while inside a hyperbaric chamber the natural state of the oxygen does not
change. Green plants produced the oxygen; modern technology just increases the air
pressure. This does not change the molecular composition of oxygen. Increased pressure
just allows oxygen to get into tissues better. Due to our purchase of the hyperbaric
chamber, athletes are able to recover from an intense workout in a much shorter space of
time. We typically use the chamber for sessions of 45 to 60 minutes daffy or three times
per week.”
E. When pushed to the limit, the true indicator of fitness is not how hard the heart operates,
but how quickly it can recover after an extreme workout. Therefore, another focus area of
study for the team in Mexico has been the endurance of the heart. To measure this
recovery rate, an electroencephalograph (EEG) is used. The EEG enables doctors to
monitor the brainwave activity from sensors placed on the scalp. Athletes exert intense
effort for a sustained period after which they are given time to rest and recover. During
these periods between intense physical exertion and recovery, doctors are able to monitor
any weaknesses in the way the heart responds. The CCG has had a big impact upon our
ability to measure the muscular endurance of the heart.

F. In 1796, the life expectancy of a human being was between 25 and 36 years, in 1886
that number basically doubled to between 45 and 50. In 1996, the life expectancy of an
average Mexican stood at around 75 years. People are living longer and this is due in large
part to the advances of modern science. It is not all sophisticated medical equipment that is
playing a part; although lesser in impact, basic advances in engineering are also greatly
assisting. Take for example, a professional tennis player. In the past, most tennis players’
shoes were constructed with fabric and a solid rubber sole. These shoes were of poor
construction and resulted in hip and foot injuries. Today the technology of shoe
construction has radically changed. Now some shoes are injected with silicone and made
of more comfortable, ergonomic1 construction. This has helped not only the elite but also
the recreational sportsperson and thus, helps in the preservation of the human body.

1 objects designed to be better adapted to the shape of the human body

Questions 1-4

The passage has eight paragraphs labelled A-F

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter A-F in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.

1..................... the natural process of oxygen production
2..................... standard after-competition procedure

3..................... the areas of study undertaken to improve athletic performance

4..................... the Mexican viewpoint on winning


Questions 5-7

Choose the correct letter A, B, C, or D.

Write your answers in boxes 5-7 on your answer sheet.

5.The hyperbaric chamber

A. helps athletes to breathe more easily.

B. increases the level of oxygen an athlete breathes.

C. decreases the pressure of the oxygen for Mexican athletes.

D. speeds up recovery time for athletes.

6.The electroencephalograph (EEC)
A. measures how fast brainwaves move during exercise.

B. helps doctors to determine heart problems.

C. measures how hard the heart works during exercise.

D. strengthens the heart muscle in athletes.

7.The life-span of individuals in Mexico has increased due to

A. medical improvements.

B. more committed doctors.

C. better made sporting equipment.
D. advances in ergonomics.


Questions 8-13
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?

In boxes 8-13 on your answer sheet write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
8..................... There are limits to the level of sporting enquiry.

9..................... Specific athletic programs differ mostly between men and women

10..................... Mexico and Germany have similar sporting resources.

11..................... Lack of money is what stops athletic improvement in some poor countries.

12..................... Wealthy countries enjoy greater athletic success.

13..................... Mexican athletes have the support of their government.

Solution:

1. D 8. FLASE
2. B 9. NOT GIVEN

3. A 10. TRUE
4. C 11. TRUE

5. D 12. NOT GIVEN
6. B 13. TRUE

7. A
