TITLE: Elnino and Seabirds
INDEX: 148
============================================================

Elnino and Seabirds

A Rhythm of the seasons cannot always be relied upon. At times the tropical Pacific Ocean
and large expanses of the global atmosphere seem to be marching to the beat of a
different drummer, disrupting the normal patterns of countless species of plants and
animals along with hundreds of millions of human beings. So they want anticipate these
occasional lapses in the march of the seasons and help societies plan accordingly,
scientists are seeking to understand these competing rhythms: the strongest of which is the
alternation between the “normal climate” and a different but still recurrent set of climatic
conditions in the Pacific region called El Nino.

B Seabirds are prominent and highly visible components of marine ecosystems that will be
affected by global climate change. The Bering Sea region is particularly important to
seabirds; populations there are larger and more diverse than in any similar region in North
America—over 90% of seabirds breeding in the continental United States are found in this
region. Seabirds, so named because they spend at least 80% of their lives at sea, are
dependent upon marine resources for food. As prey availability changes in response to
climatically driven factors such as surface sea temperature and extent of sea ice, so will
populations of seabirds be affected.


C Seabirds are valued as indicators of healthy marine ecosystems and provide a “vicarious
use value” or existence value—people appreciate and value seabirds simply because they
are there and enjoy them through venues such as pictures, nature programs, and written
accounts without ever directly observing seabirds in their native environment. A direct
measure of this value is demonstrated by Federal legislation that established specific
national wildlife refuges to protect seabirds and international treaty obligations that provide
additional protection for seabirds. Seabirds are also an important subsistence resource for
many who live within the Bering Sea Region. Furthermore, the rich knowledge base about
seabirds makes them a valuable resource as indicator species for measurement of change
in the marine environment.

D The most abundant breeding species in Alaska are northern fulmars, storm-petrels,
kittiwakes, murres, auklets and puffins. These species also form the largest colonies.

Fulmars, storm-petrels and kittiwakes are surface feeders, picking their prey from the
surface or just below the surface; murres, auklets, and puffins dive for their food. Fulmars
nest primarily on island groups in and around the Bering Sea. They take a wide variety of
prey (e.g., fish, squid, zooplankton, jellyfish) from the surface or just below the surface.
Storm-petrels are strictly nocturnal and nest below ground in either burrows or crevices
between rocks. They forage on zooplankton and squid; in some areas they are dependent
upon small fish such as capelin and sand lance caught at the surface. Black-legged
kittiwakes are widespread throughout Alaska, Canada and Eurasia while red-legged
kittiwakes are found only in the Bering Sea region. Both are surface feeders although
black-legged kittiwakes feed primarily on small fish and forage over the continental shelf
and shelf break; red-legged kittiwakes feed primarily on myctophids and will forage beyond
the shelf break.

E Marine mammals have exhibited similar signs of food stress in recent years. Harbor
seals at Tugidak Island in the Gulf of Alaska declined by about 85% between 1976 and
1988 . Steller sea lion populations declined by 36% in the Gulf of Alaska between 1977 and
1985 , and by another 59% between 1985 and . Northern fur seals declined about 35% by
1986 from their average numbers in the 1970s, although numbers had rebounded
somewhat (20%) by 1990 . Associated with the declines in Steller sea lions are declines in
birth rate, fewer breeding females, fewer pups, decreased adult body condition, decreased
juvenile survival, and a change in population age structure.


F Walker noticed that monsoon seasons with low-index conditions are often marked by
drought in Australia, Indonesia, India, and parts of Africa. He also claimed that low-index
winters tend to be unusually mild in western Canada. One of his British colleagues chided
him in print for suggesting that climatic conditions over such widely separated regions of
the globe could be linked. In his reply Walker predicted, correctly, that an explanation
would be forthcoming, but that it would require a knowledge of wind patterns above ground
level, which were not routinely being observed at that time.

G The need for long-term time series It seems obvious that without good baseline data
ornithologists are doomed to be surprised by the arrival of El Nino every few years. Even
when ornithologists and ecologists are at hand to take advantage of an incoming El Nino,
lack of preexisting data, and of monitoring afterwards, makes it difficult 134 F.M. Jaksic &
J.M. Farina to understand responses of birds to the successive El Nino, La Nina, and
“normal” years. Indeed, according to Jaksic, during the last century there were 12 El Nino
years and 12 La Nina years, thus leaving about 76 ‘normal’ years in between. Thus, by
heavily concentrating attention on only 12% of the time span El Nino, and of neglecting
possibly another 12% , ornithologists are essentially ignoring what happens during 76% of
the time. This situation may be remedied only as long as data are logged on a regular or
continuous basis, that is, as long-term time series. The recipe prescribed by Schreiber &
Schreiber to understand El Nino, effects on birds still stands: ‘…carry out long-term studies
that will shed further light on the interactions between global atmospheric cycles,
oceanographic phenomena, and avian populations.’

H Populations of seabirds in Alaska are larger and more diverse than any similar region in
the Northern Hemisphere. The extensive coastal estuaries and offshore waters of Alaska
provide breeding, feeding and migrating habitats for 66 species of seabirds. At least 38
species of seabirds, over 50 million individuals, breed in Alaska. Eight Alaskan species
breed only here and in adjacent Siberia. Five additional species range through the North
Pacific, but their populations are concentrated in Alaska. In addition to breeding grounds,
Alaskan waters also provide important wintering habitat for birds that breed in Canada and
Eurasia. Shearwaters, which breed in the southern hemisphere, are the most numerous
species in Alaskan waters during the summer.

I As another indication that food has been limiting in recent years, several largescale die-
offs of seabirds, mostly surface-feeding species, have been observed in the Gulf of Alaska
during the last decade, most notably in 1983, 1989and 1993 . But Hatch thinks that it is too
early to decide the these die-offs reports are somehow connected with effect of El nino.
Byrd and Tobish believe that high rainfall can affect survival of chicks in earthen burrows,
and incidence of big storms with high winds during the chick-rearing period can cause
mortality for chicks of species nesting on cliff-ledges, but this view has not been considered
as convincing evidence.

Questions 1-4

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D. Write your answers in boxes 1-4 on your answer
sheet.

1. Why do scientists want to investigate El Nino phenomenon at beginning of the
paragraph ?


A To learn patterns of creatures that live in marine environment.

B Assist us to map out because it disturbs normal cycle of for wildlife and human.

C It has profound theory for both the academic side and practical side.

D Tropical Pacific Ocean is where El Nino affects most.


2. Why do scientists use seabirds as important subjects when observe climate
change World-widely?

A Seabirds affected by prey changes according to the temperature and ice.

B Its size is large enough to be observed.
C El Nino affects seabirds more than other sea creatures.

D North America is situated in the area where El Nino affects most.


3. What happened for Marine mammals that live in Tugidak Island in Gulf of Alaska?

A Number of seals declined about 85% from the mid of 20th century.

B Number of Steller sea lion declined while Number seals grew.

C Birth rate and breeding females declined on the Tugidak Island.

D The situation of mammals on the island is not that worse than we expected.


4. According to J. Walker, what happens in the monsoon seasons notably?

A Flood and drought seriously damage almost everywhere of the planet.

B Walker’s prediction would soon come true.

C Drought only affects some parts of Africa.

D Drought will affect somewhere of the earth such as Australia and Indonesia.


Questions 5-13
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?

In boxes 5-13 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the sataement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
5..................... Seabirds are regarded as precious indicators of changes in oceanic
environment.

6..................... Seabirds such as Fulmars and Murres feed by the characteristic of prey in
different ways.

7..................... Steller sea lions only decline in birth rate and fewer pups, but the whole
population wouldn’t be affected by the changes.

8..................... With reply of Walker’s colleague, knowledge of wind patterns will be very
helpful.

9..................... It is difficult to investigate El Nino for ornithologists and ecologist because
lack of available statistics and inspections.

10..................... Habit of seabirds in Alaska is similar to those in the Northern Hemisphere.

11..................... Number of Shearwaters in the southern hemisphere feed most during the
summer.

12..................... Hatch thinks that it is too early to determine all the problems that are
caused by El Nino.

13..................... Byrd and Tobish think that heavy rainfall and storms cause mortality for
chicks, which has already been a convincing proof.

Solution:

1. B 8. FALSE
2. A 9. TRUE

3. C 10. NOT GIVEN
4. D 11. NOT GIVEN

5. TRUE 12. TRUE
6. TRUE 13. FALSE

7. FALSE
