TITLE: Examining the placebo effect
INDEX: 155
============================================================

Examining the placebo effect

The fact that taking a fake drug can powerfully improve some people's health - the so-
called placebo effect - was long considered an embarrassment to the serious practice of
pharmacology, but now things have changed.

Several years ago. Merck, a global pharmaceutical company, was falling behind its rivals in
sales. To make matters worse, patents on five blockbuster drugs were about to expire,
which would allow cheaper generic products to flood the market. In interviews with the
press. Edward Scolnick. Merck's Research Director, presented his plan to restore the firm
to pre-eminence. Key to his strategy was expanding the company’s reach into the anti
depressant, market, where Merck had trailed behind, while competitors like Pfizer and
GlaxoSmithKline had created some of the best-selling drugs in the world. "To remain
dominant in the future.” he told one media company, "we need to dominate the central
nervous system."

His plan hinged on the success of an experimental anti-depressant codenamed MK-869.
Still in clinical trials, it was a new kind of medication that exploited brain chemistry in
innovative ways to promote feelings of well-being. The drug tested extremely well early on.
with minimal side effects. Behind the scenes, however, MK-869 was starting to unravel.
True, many test subjects treated with the medication felt their hopelessness and anxiety lift
But so did nearly the same number who took a placebo, a look-alike pill made of milk sugar
or another ineit substance given to groups of volunteers in subsequent clinical trials to
gauge the effectiveness of the real drug by comparison Ultimately. Merck's venture into the
anti-depressant market failed. In the jargon of the industry, the trials crossed the "futility
boundary".

MK-869 has not been the only much-awaited medical breakthrough to be undone in recent
years by the placebo effect. And it's not only trials of new drugs that are crossing the futility
boundary. Some products that have been on the market for decades are faltering in more
recent follow-up tests It's not that the old medications are getting weaker, drug developers
say It's as if the placebo effect is somehow getting stronger The fact that an increasing
number of medications are unable to beat sugar pills has thrown the industry into crisis The
stakes could hardly be higher. To win FDA* approval, a new medication must beat placebo
In at least two authenticated trials. In today’s economy, the fate of a well-established
company can hang on the outcome of a handful of tests.

Why are fake pills suddenly overwhelming promising new drugs and established medicines
alike? The reasons are only just beginning to be understood. A network of independent
researchers is doggedly uncovering the inner workings and potential applications of the
placebo effect A psychiatrist. William Potter, who knew that some patients really do seem
to get healthier for reasons that have more to do with a doctor's empathy than with the
contents of a pill, was baffled by the fact that drugs he had been prescribing for years
seemed to be struggling to prove their effectiveness Thinking that a crucial factor may have
been overlooked, Potter combed through his company’s database of published and
unpublished trials—including those that had been kept secret because of high placebo
response. His team aggregated the findings from decades of anti-depressant trials, looking
for patterns and trying to see what was changing over time. What they found challenged
some of the industry’s basic assumptions about its drug-vetting process Assumption
number one was that if a trial were managed correctly, a medication would perform as well
or badly in a Phoenix hospital as in a Bangalore dinic. Potter discovered, however, that
geographic location alone could determine the outcome. By the late 1990s, for example,
the anti-anxiety drug Diazepam was still beating placebo in France and Belgium But when
the drug was tested
in the U.S. it was likely to fail. Conversely, a similar drug. Prozac, performed better in
America than it did in western Europe and South Africa. It was an unsettling prospect FDA
approval could hinge on where the company chose to conduct a trial.

Mistaken assumption number two was that the standard tests used to gauge volunteers'
improvement in trials yielded consistent results. Potter and his colleagues discovered that
ratings by trial observers varied significantly from one testing site to another. It was like
finding out that the judges in a tight race each had a different idea about the placement of
the finish line.

After some coercion by Potter and others, the National Institute of Health (NIH) focused on
the issue in 2000, hosting a three-day conference in Washington, and this conference
launched a new wave of placebo research in academic laboratories in the U.S. and Italy
that would make significant progress toward solving the mystery of what was happening in
clinical trials.

In one study last year. Harvard Medical School researcher Ted Kaptchuk devised a clever
strategy for testing his volunteers’ response to varying levels of therapeutic ritual The study
focused on a common but painful medical condition that costs more than $40 billion a year
worldwide to treat. First, the volunteers were placed randomly in one of three groups. One
group was simply put on a waiting list; researchers know that some patients get better just
because they sign up for a trial. Another group received placebo treatment from a clinician
who declined to engage in small talk. Volunteers in the third group got the same fake
treatment from a clinician who asked them questions about symptoms, outlined the causes
of the illness, and displayed optimism about their condition.

Not surprisingly, the health of those in the third group improved most. In fact, just by
participating in the trial, volunteers in this high-interaction group got as much relief as did
people taking the two leading prescription drugs for the condition. And the benefits of their
“bogus” treatment persisted for weeks afterward, contrary to the belief—widespread in the
pharmaceutical industry- that the placebo response is short-lived.

Studies like this open the door to hybrid treatment strategies that exploit the placebo effect
to make real drugs safer and more effective As Potter says. “To really do the best foi your
patients, you want the best placebo response plus the best drug response'' adapted from
Wired Magazine
* The Food and Drugs Administration (an agency in the United States responsible for
protecting public health by assunng the safety of human drugs)

Questions 1-5

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer?

Write

YES if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this


1..................... Merck’s experience with MK-869 was unique.

2..................... These days, a small number of unsuccessful test results can ruin a well-
established drugs company.

3..................... Some medical conditions are more easily treated by a placebo than
others.

4..................... It was to be expected that the third group in Kaptchuk’s trial would do
better than the other two groups.

5..................... Kaptchuk’s research highlights the fact that combined drug and placebo
treatments should be avoided.


Questions 6-10

Complete the summary using the list of words A-l below.


iMerck and MK-869

As a result of concerns about increasing 6..................... in the drugs industry,
the pharmaceutical company Merck decided to increase its 7..................... in the anti-
depressant
market. The development of the drug MK-869 was seen as the way forward.

Initially, MK-869 had some 8....................., but later trials revealed a different picture.
Although key 9..................... could be treated with the drug, a sugar pill was proving
equally effective. In the end, the 10..................... indicated that it was pointless
continuing with the development of the drug.


A activity D patients G symptoms
B prices E tests H competition
C success F diseases I criticism

Questions 11-14

Choose the correct letter A, B, C or D.

11 Which of the following is true of William Potter’s research?

A It was based on recently developed drugs that he had recommended.

B It included trial results from a range of drugs companies.

C Some of the trial results he investigated had not been made public.

D Some of his findings were not accepted by the drugs industry.


12 What did William Potter's research reveal about the location of drugs trials?

A The placebo effect was weakest in the US.

B Results were not consistent around the world.

C Results varied depending on the type of hospital.

D The FDA preferred drugs to be tested in different countries.


13 What does the tight race refer to in line 80?

A the standard tests
B consistent results

C ratings by trial observers

D testing sites


14 What significant discovery was made by Ted Kaptchuk?

A The effects of a placebo can last longer than previously thought.

B Patients’ health can improve while waiting to undergo a trial.

C Patients respond better to a placebo if they are treated by the same clinician
throughout the trial.

D Those conducting a placebo trial need to know the subjects’ disorder well.

Solution:

1. NO 8. C
2. YES 9. G

3. NOT GIVEN 10. E
4. YES 11. C

5. NO 12. B
6. H 13. A

7. A 14. A
