TITLE: Extinct: the Giant Deer
INDEX: 157
============================================================

Extinct: the Giant Deer

Toothed cats, mastodons, giant sloths, woolly rhinos, and many other big, shaggy
mammals are widely thought to have died out around the end of the last ice age, some
10,500 years ago.

A

The Irish elk is also known as the giant deer (Megaloceros giganteus). Analysis of ancient
bones and teeth by scientists based in Britain and Russia show the huge herbivore
survived until about 5,000 B.C. – more than three millennia later than previously believed.
The research team says this suggests additional factors, besides climate change, probably
hastened the giant deer’s eventual extinction. The factors could include hunting or habitat
destruction by humans.

B

The Irish elk, so-called because its well-preserved remains are often found in lake
sediments under peat bogs in Ireland, first appeared about 400,000 years ago in Europe
and Central Asia. Through a combination of radiocarbon dating of skeletal remains and the
mapping of locations where the remains were unearthed, the team shows the Irish elk was
widespread across Europe before the last “big freeze.” The deer’s range later contracted to
the Ural Mountains, in modern-day Russia, which separate Europe from Asia.

C
The giant deer made its last stand in western Siberia, some 3,000 years after the ice
sheets receded, said the study’s co-author, Adrian Lister, professor of palaeobiology at
University College London, England. “The eastern foothills of the Urals became very
densely forested about 8,000 years ago, which could have pushed them on to the plain,” he
said. He added that pollen analysis indicates the region then became very dry in response
to further climatic change, leading to the loss of important food plants. “In combination with
human pressures, this could have finally snuffed them out,” Lister said.

D

Hunting by humans has often been put forward as a contributory cause of extinction of the
Pleistocene megafauna. The team, though, said their new date for the Irish elk’s extinction
hints at an additional human-made problem – habitat destruction. Lister said, “We haven’t
got just hunting 7,000 years ago – this was also about the time the first Neolithic people
settled in the region. They were farmers who would have cleared the land.” The presence
of humans may help explain why the Irish elk was unable to tough out the latest of many
climatic fluctuations – periods it had survived in the past.
E

Meanwhile, Lister cast doubt on another possible explanation for the deer’s demise – the
male’s huge antlers. Some scientists have suggested this exaggerated feature – the result
of females preferring stags with the largest antlers, possibly because they advertised a
male’s fitness – contributed to the mammal’s downfall. They say such antlers would have
been a serious inconvenience in the dense forests that spread northward after the last ice
age. But, Lister said, “That’s a hard argument to make because the deer previously
survived perfectly well through wooded interglacials [warmer periods between ice ages].”
Some research has suggested that a lack of sufficient high-quality forage caused the
extinction of the elk. High amounts of calcium and phosphate compounds are required to
form antlers, and therefore large quantities of these minerals are required for the massive
structures of the Irish Elk. The males (and male deer in general) met this requirement partly
from their bones, replenishing them from food plants after the antlers were grown or
reclaiming the nutrients from discarded antlers (as has been observed in extant deer).
Thus, in the antler growth phase, Giant Deer was suffering from a condition similar to
osteoporosis. When the climate changed at the end of the last glacial period, the vegetation
in the animal’s habitat also changed towards species that presumably could not deliver
sufficient amounts of the required minerals, at least in the western part of its range.

F

The extinction of megafauna around the world was almost completed by the end of the last
ice age. It is believed that megafauna initially came into existence in response to glacial
conditions and became extinct with the onset of warmer climates. Tropical and subtropical
areas have experienced less radical climatic change. The most dramatic of these changes
was the transformation of a vast area of North Africa into the world’s largest desert.
Significantly, Africa escaped major faunal extinction as did tropical and sub-tropical Asia.

The human exodus from Africa and our entrance into the Americas and Australia were also
accompanied by climate change. Australia’s climate changed from cold-dry to warm-dry. As
a result, surface water became scarce. Most inland lakes became completely dry or dry in
the warmer seasons. Most large, predominantly browsing animals lost their habitat and
retreated to a narrow band in eastern Australia, where there were permanent water and
better vegetation. Some animals may have survived until about 7000 years ago. If people
have been in Australia for up to 60 000 years, then megafauna must have co-existed with
humans for at least 30 000 years. Regularly hunted modern kangaroos survived not only
10 000 years of Aboriginal hunting, but also an onslaught of commercial shooters.

G

The group of scientists led by A.J. Stuart focused on northern Eurasia, which he was taking
as Europe, plus Siberia, essentially, where they’ve got the best data that animals became
extinct in Europe during the Late Pleistocene. Some cold-adapted animals, go through into
the last part of the cold stage and then become extinct up there. So you’ve actually got two
phases of extinction. Now, neither of these coincide – these are Neanderthals here being
replaced by modern humans. There’s no obvious coincidence between the arrival of
humans or climatic change alone and these extinctions. There’s a climatic change here, so
there’s a double effect here. Again, as animals come through to the last part of the cold
stage, here there’s a fundamental change in the climate, reorganization of vegetation, and
the combination of the climatic change and the presence of humans – of advanced
Paleolithic humans – causes this wave of extinction. There’s a profound difference between
the North American data and that of Europe, which summarize that the extinctions in
northern Eurasia, in Europe, are moderate and staggered, and in North America severe
and sudden. And these things relate to the differences in the timing of human arrival. The
extinction follows from human predation, but only at times of fundamental changes in the
environment.

Questions 28-32

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage.

Using NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 28-32 on your answer sheet.


Having been preserved well in Europe and Central Asia, the remains of the Irish elk was
initially found approximately 28..................... Around 29....................., they were driven to
live in the plain after being restricted to the Ural Mountains. Hunting was considered as one
of the important factors of Irish elk’s extinction, people have not started hunting
until 30..................... when Irish elk used to get through under a variety of climatic
fluctuations.

The huge antlers may possibly contribute to the reason why Irish elk extinct, which was
highly controversial as they live pleasantly over the span of 31...................... Generally, it is
well-known that, at the last maximum ice age, mammals become extinct
about 32......................


Questions 33-35

Answer the questions below.
Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER from the passage for
each answer.

33..................... What kind of physical characteristics eventually contributed to the
extinction of Irish elk?

34..................... What kind of nutrient substance needed in maintaining the huge size of
Irish elk?

35..................... What geographical evidence suggested the advent of human resulted in
the extinction of Irish elk?


Questions 36-39

Choose the letter A-D and write your answers in boxes 36-39 on your answer sheet.

A Eurasia
B Australia

C Asia

D Africa

36..................... the continents where humans imposed a little impact on large mammals
extinction
37..................... the continents where the climatic change was mild and fauna remains

38..................... the continents where both humans and climatic change are the causes

39..................... the continents where the climatic change along caused a massive
extinction


Question 40

Which statement is true according to the Stuart team’s finding?

A Neanderthals rather than modern humans caused the extinction in Europe

B Paleolithic humans in Europe along kill the big animals such as Giant deer

C climatic change was not solely responsible for the megafauna extinction in Europe

D moderate and staggered extinction was mainly the result of fundamental climatic
change

Solution:

8. habitat
1. 400,000 years ago
destruction
2. 8000 years ago 9. B
3. 7000 years ago 10. D
4. wooded
11. A
interglacials
5. 10500 years ago 12. C

6. Male’s huge
13. C
antlers
7. minerals
