TITLE: Facial Expression 1
INDEX: 158
============================================================

Facial Expression 1

A

A facial expression is one or more motions or positions of the muscles in the skin. These
movements convey the emotional state of the individual to observers. Facial expressions
are a form of nonverbal communication. They are a primary means of conveying social
information among aliens, but also occur in most other mammals and some other animal
species. Facial expressions and their significance in the perceiver can, to some extent,
vary between cultures with evidence from descriptions in the works of Charles Darwin.

B

Humans can adopt a facial expression to read as a voluntary action. However, because
expressions are closely tied to emotion, they are more often involuntary. It can be nearly
impossible to avoid expressions for certain emotions, even when it would be strongly
desirable to do so; a person who is trying to avoid insulting an individual he or she finds
highly unattractive might, nevertheless, show a brief expression of disgust before being
able to reassume a neutral expression. Microexpressions are one example of this
phenomenon. The close link between emotion and expression can also work in the order
direction; it has been observed that voluntarily assuming an expression can actually cause
the associated emotion.

C

Some expressions can be accurately interpreted even between members of different
species – anger and extreme contentment being the primary examples. Others, however,
are difficult to interpret even in familiar individuals. For instance, disgust and fear can be
tough to tell apart. Because faces have only a limited range of movement, expressions rely
upon fairly minuscule differences in the proportion and relative position of facial features,
and reading them requires considerable sensitivity to the same. Some faces are often
falsely read as expressing some emotion, even when they are neutral because their
proportions naturally resemble those another face would temporarily assume when
emoting.
D

Also, a person’s eyes reveal much about hos they are feeling, or what they are
thinking. Blink rate can reveal how nervous or at ease a person maybe. Research by

Boston College professor Joe Tecce suggests that stress levels are revealed by blink rates.
He supports his data with statistics on the relation between the blink rates of presidential
candidates and their success in their races. Tecce claims that the faster blinker in the
presidential debates has lost every election since 1980. Though Tecce’s data is interesting,
it is important to recognize that non-verbal communication is multi-channelled, and
focusing on only one aspect is reckless. Nervousness can also be measured by examining
each candidates’ perspiration, eye contact and stiffness.

E

As Charles Darwin noted in his book The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals:
the young and the old of widely different races, both with man and animals, express the
same state of mind by the same movements. Still, up to the mid-20th century,
most anthropologists believed that facial expressions were entirely learned and could,
therefore, differ among cultures. Studies conducted in the 1960s by Paul Ekman eventually
supported Darwin’s belief to a large degree.

F

Ekman’s work on facial expressions had its starting point in the work of psychologist Silvan
Tomkins. Ekman showed that contrary to the belief of some anthropologists including
Margaret Mead, facial expressions of emotion are not culturally determined, but universal
across human cultures. The South Fore people of New Guinea were chosen as subjects for
one such survey. The study consisted of 189 adults and 130 children from among a very
isolated population, as well as twenty-three members of the culture who lived a less
isolated lifestyle as a control group. Participants were told a story that described one
particular emotion; they were then shown three pictures (two for children) of facial
expressions and asked to match the picture which expressed the story’s emotion.

G

While the isolated South Fore people could identify emotions with the same accuracy as
the non-isolated control group, problems associated with the study include the fact that
both fear and surprise were constantly misidentified. The study concluded that certain facial
expressions correspond to particular emotions and can not be covered, regardless of
cultural background, and regardless of whether or not the culture has been isolated or
exposed to the mainstream.

H

Expressions Ekman found to be universally included those indicating anger, disgust, fear,
joy, sadness, and surprise (not that none of these emotions has a definitive social
component, such as shame, pride, or schadenfreude). Findings on contempt (which is
social) are less clear, though there is at least some preliminary evidence that this emotion
and its expression are universally recognized. This may suggest that the facial expressions
are largely related to the mind and each part on the face can express specific emotion.

Questions 1-5

Summary
Complete the Summary paragraph below. In boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet, write the
correct answer with NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS

The result of Ekman’s study demonstrates that fear and surprise are
persistently 1..................... and made a conclusion that some facial expressions have
something to do with certain 2...................... Which is impossible covered, despite of
3..................... and whether the culture has been 4..................... or 5..................... to the
mainstream.


Questions 6-11

The reading Passage has seven paragraphs A-H
Which paragraph contains the following information?
Write the correct letter A-H, in boxes 6-11 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.


6..................... the difficulty identifying the actual meaning of facial expressions

7..................... the importance of culture on facial expressions is initially described
8..................... collected data for the research on the relation between blink and the
success in elections

9..................... the features on the sociality of several facial expressions

10..................... an indicator to reflect one’s extent of nervousness

11..................... the relation between emotion and facial expressions


Questions 12-13

Choose two letters from the A-E
Write your answers in boxes 12-13 on your answer sheet

Which Two of the following statements are true according to Ekman’s theory?
A No evidence shows animals have their own facial expressions.

B The potential relationship between facial expression and state of mind exists

C Facial expressions are concerning different cultures.

D Different areas on face convey a certain state of mind.

E Mind controls men’s facial expressions more obvious than women’s

Solution:

1. misidentified 8. D
2. emotions 9. H

3. cultural background 10. D
4. isolated 11. B

5. exposed 12. B
6. C 13. D

7. A
