TITLE: Fear of the Unknown
INDEX: 160
============================================================

Fear of the Unknown

American companies fear that innovation is the secret of success-and that they cannot
innovate

In the small Umagic office in midtown Manhattan, a team of 30 computer programmers are
working on setting up websites that will allow subscribers to feed in details about
themselves and their problems and to receive advice from ‘virtual’ versions of personalities
regarded as experts in their fields: for example, a well-known dietician, a celebrity fitness
trainer, a psychologist well known in the media for here work on parent-child relationships .
Umagic Systems is a young firm and it’s hard to predict how far they’ll go .hl ten years’
time, consulting a computer about your diet problems might seem natural or it might seem
absurd. But the company and others like it are beginning to seriously worry large American
firms, who see such half-crazy new and innovative ideas as a threat to their own future
success.

Innovation has become a major concern of American management. Firms have found that
it is increasingly difficult to redesign existing products or to produce them more
economically. The stars of American business tend today to be innovators such as Amazon
(the internet bookstore) and Wal-Mart (the supermarket chain) which have produced
completely new ideas or products that have changed their industries.

Over the past 15 years, the firms which have achieved the greatest profits have been the
ones which have had the most innovations. But such profits aren’t easy to come by .One of
the reasons for the increasing number of mergers between companies is a desperate
search for new ideas. And a fortune is spent nowadays on identifying and protecting
intellectual property: other people’s ideas.
According to the Pasadena-based Patent & License Exchange in the United States ,
trading in intangible assets such as intellectual property rose from$15 billion in 1990 to $

100 billion in 1998,with an increasing proportion of the rewards going to small firms and
individuals.

And therein lies the terror for big companies : that innovation seems to work best outside
them. Many of the large established companies have been struggling to come up with new
products recently.' In the management of creativity ,size is your enemy,’ argues Peter
Chemin ,who runs Fox TV and film empire for News Corporation. "One person managing
20 movies is never going to be as involved as one doing five movies .'He has thus tried to
break down the studio into smaller units ,even at the risk of incurring higher costs.

It is easier for ideas to develop outside big firms these days. In the past, if a clever scientist
had an idea he wanted to commercialise ,he would take it first to a big company. Now, with
the banks encouraging individuals to set up new businesses through offering special loans,
innovators are more likely to set up on their own. Umagic has already raised $5 million and
is about to raise $25 million more. Even in capital-intensive businesses such as
pharmaceuticals, entrepreneurs can conduct profitable, early- stage research,selling out to
the big firms when they reach expensive,risky clinical trials.

Some giants, including General Electric and Cisco, have been remarkably successful at
buying up and integrating scores of small companies. But many others worry about the
prices they have to pay and the difficulty in keeping hold of the people who dreamt up the
ideas . Everybody would like to develop more ideas in-house. Procter & Gamble is now
changing the entire direction of its business from global expansion to product development;
one of its new aims is to get innovations accepted across the company .Elsewhere ,the
search for innovation had led to a craze for ' intrapreneurship ’ -giving more power to
individuals in the company and setting up internal ideas -factories so that talents staff will
not leave.

And yet innovation does not happen just because the chief executive wills it. Indeed ,it is
extremely difficult to come up with new ideas year in, year out, especially brilliant ones.
Underneath all experts' diagrams , lists and charts ,most of the available answers seem to
focus on two strengths that are difficult to impose: a culture that looks for new ideas, and
leaders who know which ones to back. Companies have to discredit the widespread view
that jobs working on new products are for ‘those who can't cope in the real business'. They
have to change the culture by introducing hard incentives, such as giving more generous
bonuses to those who come up with successful new ideas and, particularly ,not punishing
those whose experiments fail.

Will all this reorganization and culture tweaking make big firms more creative? David Post,
the founder of Umagic, isn't so sure:’ He also recalls with glee the looks of total
incomprehension when he tried to sell his 'virtual experts ' idea three years ago to firms
such IBM , though ,as he cheerfully adds,’ of course, they could have been right'.
Apparently, innovation -unlike diet,fitness and parenting -is one area where a computer
cannot tell you what to do.

Questions 1-7

Reading Passage has eight paragraphs A-H.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter, A-H, in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet.

NB you may use any letter more than once.

1..................... the methods some companies use to try to keep their
most creative employees

2..................... a new way of getting help with your personal
difficulties

3..................... how much investment goes into safeguarding the
ideas of individuals

4..................... two examples of companies which have succeeded
through being innovative
5..................... how some innovators manage to avoid spending large
sums of money on testing out their ideas
6..................... a commonly held opinion about product designers that
needs to be proved wrong
7..................... the target of one large company that has changed its
business focus


Questions 8-11

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?

In boxes 8-11 on your answer sheet,write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this

8..................... Umagic Systems is an example of a new innovative company.

9..................... Amazon and Wal-Mart have exchanged successful ideas on
innovation.

10..................... Using financial rewards to encourage innovation is an outdated
practice.

11..................... IBM failed to understand David Post's 'virtual experts’ idea.

Questions 12-14

Choose the correct letter, A,B,C or D

Write the correct letter in boxes 12-14 on your answer sheet.

12. What point does the writer make about intellectual property?

A It can be lost when firms merge.

B It tends to belong to companies rather than individuals.

C It is valued more than it used to be.

D It is not usually owned by small companies.
13. Peter Chemin is an example of someone who has realized that

A large companies are less innovative than small ones.

B other businesses are more innovative than the film business,

C his employees need more experience of innovation.

D he is the best person to encourage innovation.

14. In conclusion, the writer suggests that

A computer-based industries cannot be innovative.

B big firms are right to be cautious about innovation,
C small firms should not worry about early failures.

D innovation will always involve some uncertainty.

Solution:

1. F 8. TRUE
2. A 9. NOT GIVEN

3. C 10. FALSE
4. B 11. TRUE

5. E 12. C
6. G 13. A

7. F 14. D
