TITLE: FINDING THE LOST FREEDOM
INDEX: 163
============================================================

FINDING THE LOST FREEDOM

1. The private car is assumed to have widened our horizons and increased our mobility.
When we consider our children’s mobility, they can be driven to more places (and more
distant places) than they could visit without access to a motor vehicle. However, allowing
our cities to be dominated by cars has progressively eroded children’s independent
mobility. Children have lost much of their freedom to explore their own neighborhood or city
without adult supervision. In recent surveys, when parents in some cities were asked about
their own childhood experiences, the majority remembered having more, or far more,
opportunities for going out on their own, compared with their own children today. They had
more freedom to explore their own environment.

2. Children’s independent access to their local streets may be important for their own
personal, mental and psychological development. Allowing them to get to know their own
neighborhood and community gives them a "sense of place”. This depends on "active
exploration”, which is not provided for when children are passengers in cars. (Such children
may see more, but they learn less.) Not only is it important that children be able to get to
local play areas by themselves, but walking and cycling journeys to school and to other
destinations provide genuine play activities in themselves.

3. They are very significant time and money costs for parents associated with
transporting their children to school, sport and other locations. Research in the United
Kingdom estimated that this cost, in 1990, was between 10 billion and 20 million pounds.

(AIPPG)
4. The reduction in children’s freedom may also contribute to a weakening of the sense of
local community. As fewer children and adults use the streets as pedestrians, these streets
become less sociable places. There is less opportunity for children and adults to have the
spontaneous of community. This in itself may exacerbate fears associated with assault and
molestation of children, because there are fewer adults available who know their neighbors’
children, and who can look out for their safety.

5. The extra traffic involved in transporting children results in increased traffic congestion,
pollution and accident risk. As our roads become more dangerous, more parents drive their
children to more places, thus contributing to increased levels of danger for the remaining
pedestrians. Anyone who has experienced either the reduced volume of traffic in peak hour
during school holidays, or the traffic jams near schools at the end of a school day, will not
need convincing about these points. Thus, there are also important environmental
implications of children’s loss of freedom.

6. As individuals, parents strive to provide the best upbringing they can for their
children. However, in doing so, (e.g. by driving their children to sport, school or recreation)

parents may be contributing to a more dangerous environment for children generally. The
idea that “streets are for cars and back yards and playgrounds are for children” is a strongly
held belief, and parents have little choice as individuals but to keep their children off the
streets if they want to protect their safety.

7. In many parts of Dutch cities, and some traffic calmed precincts in Germany,
residential streets are now places where cars must give way to pedestrians. In these areas,
residents are accepting the view that the function of streets is not solely to provide mobility
for cars. Streets may also be for social interaction, walking, cycling and playing. One of the
most important aspects of these European streets, in terms of giving cities back to children,
has been a range of “traffic calming” initiatives, aimed at reducing the volume and speed of
traffic. These initiatives have had complex interactive effects, leading to a sense that
children have been able to do this in safety. Recent research has demonstrated that
children in many German cities have significantly higher levels of freedom to travel to
places in their own neighborhood or city than children in other cities in the world.

8. Modifying cities in order to enhance children’s freedom will not only benefit children.
Such cities will become more environmentally sustainable, as well as more sociable and
more livable for all city residents. Perhaps, it will be our concern for our children’s welfare
that convinces us that we need to challenge the dominance of the car in our cities.

Questions 6-9

In Paragraph 4 and 5 there are FOUR problems stated. These problems, numbered as
questions 6-9. Find the correct cause for each of the problems and write the corresponding
letter A-G. There are more causes than problems so you will not use all of them and you
may use any cause more than once.

Problems

Example: low sense of community feeling Answer: F

6..................... streets become less sociable

7..................... fewer chances for meeting friends

8..................... fears of danger for children

9..................... higher accident risk


Causes
A few adults know local children

B fewer people use the streets

C increased pollution

D streets are less friendly

E less traffic in school holidays

F reduced freedom for children

G more children driven to school


Questions 10-14

Complete the sentences.

Choose the correct ending for each statement endings numbered i-x.


Example: By driving children to school, parents help create... Answer: i

10 Children should play 10..................... i...a dangerous environment
11 In some German towns, pedestrians have right of way 11..................... ¡¡...modified

12 Streets should also be used for 12..................... iii...on residential streets
iv...modifying cities
v...neighborhoods
vi...socializing
13 Reducing the amount of traffic and the speed is 13.....................
vii...in backyards
14 All people who live in the city will benefit if cities are 14.....................
viii...for cars
ix...traffic calming
x...residential

Solution:

1. FALSE 8. G
2. TRUE 9. D

3. NOT GIVEN 10. vii
4. FALSE 11. iii

5. FALSE 12. vi
6. B 13. ix

7. F 14. ii
