TITLE: Flying tortoises
INDEX: 167
============================================================

Flying tortoises

An airborne reintroduction programme has helped conservationists take significant steps to protect the
endangered Galapagos tortoise.

A

Forests of spiny cacti cover much of the uneven lava plains that separate the interior of the Galapagos island of
Isabela from the Pacific Ocean. With its five distinct volcanoes, the island resembles a lunar landscape. Only the
thick vegetation at the skirt of the often cloud-covered peak of Sierra Negra offers respite from the barren terrain
below.

This inhospitable environment is home to the giant Galapagos tortoise. Some time after the Galapagos’s birth,
around five million years ago, the islands were colonised by one or more tortoises from mainland South
America. As these ancestral tortoises settled on the individual islands, the different populations adapted to their
unique environments, giving rise to at least 14 different subspecies. Island life agreed with them. In the absence
of significant predators, they grew to become the largest and longest-living tortoises on the planet, weighing
more than 400 kilograms, occasionally exceeding 1,8 metres in length and living for more than a century.

B

Before human arrival, the archipelago's tortoises numbered in the hundreds of thousands. From the 17th century
onwards, pirates took a few on board for food, but the arrival of whaling ships in the 1790s saw this exploitation
grow exponentially. Relatively immobile and capable of surviving for months without food or water, the tortoises
were taken on board these ships to act as food supplies during long ocean passages. Sometimes, their bodies
were processed into high- grade oil.

In total, an estimated 200,000 animals were taken from the archipelago before the 20th century. This historical
exploitation was then exacerbated when settlers came to the islands. They hunted the tortoises and destroyed
their habitat to clear land for agriculture. They also introduced alien species - ranging from cattle, pigs, goats,
rats and dogs to plants and ants - that either prey on the eggs and young tortoises or damage or destroy their
habitat.

C

Today, only 11 of the original subspecies survive and of these, several are highly endangered. In 1989, work
began on a tortoise-breeding centre just outside the town of Puerto Villamil on Isabela, dedicated to protecting
the island’s tortoise populations. The centre’s captive-breeding programme proved to be extremely successful,
and it eventually had to deal with an overpopulation problem.

D

The problem was also a pressing one. Captive-bred tortoises can’t be reintroduced into the wild until they’re at
least five years old and weigh at least 4,5 kilograms, at which point their size and weight - and their hardened
shells - are sufficient to protect them from predators. But if people wait too long after that point, the tortoises
eventually become too large to transport.

E
For years, repatriation efforts were carried out in small numbers, with the tortoises carried on the backs of men
over weeks of long, treacherous hikes along narrow trails. But in November 2010, the environmentalist and
Galapagos National Park liaison officer Godfrey Merlin, a visiting private motor yacht captain and a helicopter
pilot gathered around a table in a small cafe in Puerto Ayora on the island of Santa Cruz to work out more
ambitious reintroduction. The aim was to use a helicopter to move 300 of the breeding centre’s tortoises to
various locations close to Sierra Negra.

F
This unprecedented effort was made possible by the owners of the 67-metre yacht White Cloud, who provided
the Galapagos National Park with free use of their helicopter and its experienced pilot, as well as the logistical
support of the yacht, its captain and crew. Originally an air ambulance, the yacht’s helicopter has a rear double
door and a large internal space that’s well suited for cargo, so a custom crate was designed to hold up to 33
tortoises with a total weight of about 150 kilograms. This weight, together with that of the fuel, pilot and four
crew, approached the helicopter’s maximum payload, and there were times when it was clearly right on the edge
of the helicopter’s capabilities. During a period of three days, a group of volunteers from the breeding centre
worked around the clock to prepare the young tortoises for transport. Meanwhile, park wardens, dropped off
ahead of time in remote locations, cleared landing sites within the thick brush, cacti and lava rocks.
G

Upon their release, the juvenile tortoises quickly spread out over their ancestral territory, investigating their new
surroundings and feeding on the vegetation. Eventually, one tiny tortoise came across a fully grown giant who
had been lumbering around the island for around a hundred years. The two stood side by side, a powerful
symbol of the regeneration of an ancient species.

Questions 1-7

Reading Passage has seven paragraphs, A-G.

Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-viii, in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet.

1..................... Paragraph A

2..................... Paragraph B
3..................... Paragraph C

4..................... Paragraph D

5..................... Paragraph E

6..................... Paragraph F

7..................... Paragraph G

List of Headings
i The importance of getting the timing right
ii Young meets old

Developments to the disadvantage of tortoise
iii
populations
iv Planning a bigger idea
v Tortoises populate the islands
vi Carrying out a carefully prepared operation
vii Looking for a home for the islands’ tortoises
viii The start of the conservation project


Questions 8-13

Complete the notes below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 8-13 on your answer sheet.


The decline of the Galapagos tortoise


• Originally from mainland South America

• Numbers on Galapagos islands increased, due to lack of predators
• 17th century: small numbers taken onto ships used by 8.....................
• 1790s: very large numbers taken onto whaling ships, kept for 9..................... and also
used to produce 10.....................
• Hunted by 11..................... on islands

• Habitat destruction: for the establishment of agriculture and by various
12..................... not native to the islands, which also fed on baby tortoises and tortoises’

13.....................

Solution:

1. v 8. pirates
2. iii 9. food

3. viii 10. oil
4. i 11. settlers

5. iv 12. species
6. vi 13. eggs

7. ii
