TITLE: Fun for the Masses
INDEX: 174
============================================================

Fun for the Masses

Americans worry that the distribution of income is increasingly unequal. Examining
leisure spending, changes that picture

A Are you better off than you used to be? Even after six years of sustained
economic growth, Americans worry about that question. Economists who plumb
government income statistics agree that Americans’ incomes, as measured in
inflation-adjusted dollars, have risen more slowly in the past two decades than in
earlier times, and that some workers’ real incomes have actually fallen. They also
agree that by almost any measure, income is distributed less equally than it used to
be. Neither of those claims, however, sheds much light on whether living standards
are rising or falling. This is because ‘living standard’ is a highly amorphous concept.
Measuring how much people earn is relatively easy, at least compared with
measuring how well they live.

B A recent paper by Dora Costa, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, looks at the living-standards debate from an unusual direction. Rather
than worrying about cash incomes, Ms Costa investigates Americans’ recreational
habits over the past century. She finds that people of all income levels have steadily
increased the amount of time and money they devote to having fun. The distribution
of dollar incomes may have become more skewed in recent years, but leisure is
more evenly spread than ever.

C Ms Costa bases her research on consumption surveys dating back as far as 1888.
The industrial workers surveyed in that year spent, on average, three-quarters of
their incomes on food, shelter and clothing. Less than 2% of the average family’s
income was spent on leisure but that average hid large disparities. The share of a
family’s budget that was spent on having fun rose sharply with its income: the
lowest-income families in this working-class sample spent barely 1% of their
budgets on recreation, while higher earners spent more than 3%. Only the latter
group could afford such extravagances as theatre and concert performances, which
were relatively much more expensive than they are today.

D Since those days, leisure has steadily become less of a luxury. By 1991, the
average household needed to devote only 38% of its income to the basic
necessities, and was able to spend 6% on recreation. Moreover, Ms Costa finds that
the share of the family budget spent on leisure now rises much less sharply with
income than it used to. At the beginning of this century a family’s recreational
spending tended to rise by 20% for every 10% rise in income. By 1972-73, a 10%
income gain led to roughly a 15% rise in recreational spending, and the increase fell
to only 13% in 1991. What this implies is that Americans of all income levels are now
able to spend much more of their money on having fun.

E One obvious cause is that real income overall has risen. If Americans in general
are richer, their consumption of entertainment goods is less likely to be affected by
changes in their income. But Ms Costa reckons that rising incomes are responsible
for, at most, half of the changing structure of leisure spending. Much of the rest may
be due to the fact that poorer Americans have more time off than they used to. In
earlier years, low-wage workers faced extremely long hours and enjoyed few days
off. But since the 1940s, the less skilled (and lower paid) have worked ever-fewer
hours, giving them more time to enjoy leisure pursuits.

F Conveniently, Americans have had an increasing number of recreational
possibilities to choose from. Public investment in sports complexes, parks and golf
courses has made leisure cheaper and more accessible. So too has technological
innovation. Where listening to music used to imply paying for concert tickets or
owning a piano, the invention of the radio made music accessible to everyone and
virtually free. Compact discs, videos and other paraphernalia have widened the
choice even further.

G At a time when many economists are pointing accusing fingers at technology for
causing a widening inequality in the wages of skilled and unskilled workers, Ms
Costa’s research gives it a much more egalitarian face. High earners have always
been able to afford amusement. By lowering the price of entertainment, technology
has improved the standard of living of those in the lower end of the income
distribution. The implication of her results is that once recreation is taken into
account, the differences in Americans’ living standards may not have widened so
much after all.

H These findings are not water-tight. Ms Costa’s results depend heavily upon what
exactly is classed as a recreational expenditure. Reading is an example. This was
the most popular leisure activity for working men in 1888, accounting for one-quarter
of all recreational spending. In 1991, reading took only 16% of the entertainment dollar.

But the American Department of Labour’s expenditure surveys do not distinguish between
the purchase of a mathematics tome and that of a best-selling novel. Both are classified as
recreational expenses. If more money is being spent on textbooks and professional books
now than in earlier years, this could make ‘recreational’ spending appear stronger than it
really is.

I Although Ms Costa tries to address this problem by showing that her results still
hold even when tricky categories, such as books, are removed from the sample, the
difficulty is not entirely eliminated. Nonetheless, her broad conclusion seems fair.

Recreation is more available to all and less dependent on income. On this measure
at least, inequality of living standards has fallen.

Questions 1-7

Reading Passage 2 has nine paragraphs A-I.

From the list of headings below choose the most suitable heading for each paragraph.
Write the appropriate numbers (i-xi) in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet.


List of headings
i Wide differences in leisure activities according to income
ii Possible inconsistencies in Ms Costa’s data
iii More personal income and time influence leisure activities
iv Investigating the lifestyle problem from a new angle
v Increased incomes fail to benefit everyone
vi A controversial development offers cheaper leisure activities
vii Technology heightens differences in living standards
viii The gap between income and leisure spending closes
ix Two factors have led to a broader range of options for all
x Have people’s lifestyles improved?

xi High earners spend less on leisure


Example Answer

Paragraph E iii


1..................... Paragraph A
2..................... Paragraph B

3..................... Paragraph C

4..................... Paragraph D

5..................... Paragraph F

6..................... Paragraph G

7..................... Paragraph H


Questions 8-12
Complete each of the following statements (Questions 8-12) using words from the box.

8 It is easier to determine 8..................... than living standards.

9 A decrease in 9..................... during the 20th century led to a bigger investment in
leisure.

10 According to Ms Costa, how much Americans spend on leisure has been directly
affected by salaries and 10.....................

11 The writer notes both positive and negative influences of 11.....................

12 According to the writer, the way Ms Costa defined 12..................... may have been
misleading.


Questions 13

Choose the appropriate letter A-D and write it in box 13 on your answer sheet.

13. The writer thinks that Ms Costa

A provides strong evidence to support her theory.
B displays serious flaws in her research methods.

C attempts to answer too many questions.

D has a useful overall point to make.

Solution:

1. x 8. income levels
2. iv 9. non-luxury spending

3. i 10. holiday time
4. viii 11. computer technology

5. ix 12. recreational activities
6. vi 13. D

7. ii
