TITLE: Glaciers
INDEX: 178
============================================================

Glaciers

A

Besides the earth’s oceans, glacier ice is the largest source of water on earth. A glacier is a
massive stream or sheet of ice that moves underneath itself under the influence of gravity.
Some glaciers travel down mountains or valleys, while others spread across a large
expanse of land. Heavily glaciated regions such as Greenland and Antarctica are called
continental glaciers. These two ice sheets encompass more than 95 percent of the earth’s
glacial ice. The Greenland ice sheet is almost 10,000 feet thick in some areas, and the
weight of this glacier is so heavy that much of the region has been depressed below sea
level. Smaller glaciers that occur at higher elevations are called alpine or valley glaciers.
Another way of classifying glaciers is in terms of their internal temperature. In temperate
glaciers, the ice within the glacier is near its melting point. Polar glaciers, in contrast,
always maintain temperatures far below melting.

B

The majority of the earth’s glaciers are located near the poles, though glaciers exist on all
continents, including Africa and Oceania. The reason glaciers are generally formed in high
alpine regions is that they require cold temperatures throughout the year. In these areas
where there is little opportunity for summer ablation (loss of mass), snow changes to
compacted fim and then crystallized ice. During periods in which melting and evaporation
exceed the amount of snowfall, glaciers will retreat rather than progress. While glaciers rely
heavily on snowfall, other climactic conditions including freezing rain, avalanches, and
wind, contribute to their growth. One year of below average precipitation can stunt the
growth of a glacier tremendously. With the rare exception of surging glaciers, a common
glacier flows about 10 inches per day in the summer and 5 inches per day in the winter.
The fastest glacial surge on record occurred in 1953, when the Kutiah Glacier in Pakistan
grew more than 12 kilometers in three months.

C

The weight and pressure of ice accumulation causes glacier movement. Glaciers move out
from under themselves, via plastic deformation and basal slippage. First, the internal flow
of ice crystals begins to spread outward and downward from the thickened snow pack also
known as the zone of accumulation. Next, the ice along the ground surface begins to slip in
the same direction. Seasonal thawing at the base of the glacier helps to facilitate this
slippage. The middle of a glacier moves faster than the sides and bottom because there is
no rock to cause friction. The upper part of a glacier rides on the ice below. As a glacier
moves it carves out a U-shaped valley similar to a riverbed, but with much steeper walls
and a flatter bottom.

D

Besides the extraordinary rivers of ice, glacial erosion creates other unique physical
features in the landscape such as horns, fjords, hanging valleys, and cirques. Most of these
landforms do not become visible until after a glacier has receded. Many are created by
moraines, which occur at the sides and front of a glacier. Moraines are formed when
material is picked up along the way and deposited in a new location. When many alpine
glaciers occur on the same mountain, these moraines can create a horn. The Matterhorn,
in the Swiss Alps is one of the most famous horns. Fjords, which are very common in
Norway, are coastal valleys that fill with ocean water during a glacial retreat. Hanging
valleys occur when two or more glacial valleys intersect at varying elevations. It is common
for waterfalls to connect the higher and lower hanging valleys, such as in Vosemite

National Park. A cirque is a large bowlshaped valley that forms at the front of a glacier.
Cirques often have a lip on their down slope that is deep enough to hold small lakes when
the ice melts away.

E

Glacier movement and shape shifting typically occur over hundreds of years. While
presently about 10 percent of the earth’s land is covered with glaciers, it is believed that
during the last Ice Age glaciers covered approximately 32 percent of the earth’s surface. In
the past century, most glaciers have been retreating rather than flowing forward. It is
unknown whether this glacial activity is due to human impact or natural causes, but by
studying glacier movement, and comparing climate and agricultural profiles over hundreds
of years, glaciologists can begin to understand environmental issues such as global
warming.

Questions 1-5

Reading Passage 1 has five paragraphs, A-E. Choose the most suitable heading for each
paragraph from the list of headings below.

Write the appropriate numbers (i-viii) on your Answer Sheet

There are more headings than paragraphs, so you will not use them all.

List of Headings
i Glacial Continents
Formation and Growth of
1 Paragraph A 1..................... ii
Glaciers
2 Paragraph B 2..................... iii Glacial Movement
Glaciers in the Last Ice
iv
3 Paragraph C 3.....................
Age
Glaciers Through the
4 Paragraph D 4..................... v
Years
5 Paragraph E 5..................... vi Types of Glaciers
Glacial Effects on
vii
Landscape
viiiGlaciers in National Parks

Questions 6-10
Do the following statements agree with the information in Passage 1 ? in boxes 6-10 on
your Answer Sheet, write
TRUE if the statement is true according to the passage.

FALSE if the statement contradicts the passage.

NOT GIVEN if there is no information about this in the passage.
6..................... Glaciers exist only near the north and south poles.

7..................... Glaciers are formed by a combination of snow and other weather
conditions.

8..................... Glaciers normally move at a rate of about 5 to 10 inches a day.

9..................... All parts of the glacier move at the same speed.

10..................... During the last Ice Age, average temperatures were much lower than
they are now.


Questions 11-15

Match each definition below with the term it defines.

Write the letter of the term, A-H, on your Answer Sheet

There are more terms than definitions, so you will not use them all
Terms
A fjord

B alpine glacier

C horn
D polar glacier

E temperate glacier

F hanging valley
G cirque

H surging glacier

11 a glacier formed on a mountain 11.....................

12 a glacier with temperatures well below freezing 12.....................
13 a glacier that moves very quickly 13.....................

14 a glacial valley formed near the ocean 14.....................

15 a glacial valley that looks like a bowl 15.....................

Solution:

1. vi 9. FALSE
2. ii 10. NOT GIVEN

3. iii 11. B
4. vii 12. D

5. v 13. H
6. FALSE 14. A

7. TRUE 15. G

8. TRUE
