TITLE: Global Warming in New Zealand 2
INDEX: 182
============================================================

Global Warming in New Zealand 2

A

New Zealand is expected to warm by about 3°C over the next century. The northern polar
regions will be more than 6°C warmer, while the large continents – also the largest centres
of population – will be 4°C or warmer. In contrast, the Southern Ocean, which surrounds
New Zealand, may warm by only 2°C. The sea will act as an air conditioner and in this
aspect, New Zealand’s location is comparatively fortunate.

B

Any predictions are complicated by the variability of New Zealand’s climate. The annual
temperature can fluctuate as much as 1°C above or below the long-term average. The
early summer of 2006-7, for instance, was notably cool, thanks in part to the iceberg that
drifted up the east coast. A few months later, warm water from the Tasman Sea helped
make May 2007 unusually hot. These variables will continue unaffected so that, although
the general pattern will be for rising temperatures, the warming trend may not be uniform.
C

The Ocean to the south of New Zealand will have one important effect. As the world
warms, the great bank of west winds that circle Antarctica will become stronger. This has
already been observed, and its impact on New Zealand is likely to be profound, stronger,
more frequent west winds will bring increased, sometimes catastrophic rainfall to the west
coast of the country and create drier conditions in some eastern regions that are already
drought-prone. At the same time, the general warming will spread south.

D

Furthermore, in the drier regions, the average moisture deficit – that is, the difference
between the amount of water in soils available to plants and the amount plants need for
optimum growth – will increase. Soils could go into moisture deficit earlier in the growing
season and the deficits could last longer into autumn that at present. What we think of
today as a medium-severity drought could be an almost annual occurrence by the end of
the century. One direct consequence of warmer – and shorter – winters will be a reduction
in snow cover. The permanent snow line in the mountains will rise, while snow cover below
this will be shorter-lived. The amount of snow that falls may actually increase, however,
even in some northern centres, owing to the intensification of precipitation, Ski-field base
station may eventually have to be moved upwards to be within reach of the new snow line
but there could still be plenty of the white stuff up there.

E
There will also be a marked impact on New Zealand’s glaciers. Over the last 100 years, the
glaciers have been reduced by 35%, although since 1978 increase snowfall has offset the
effect of warming. The latest studies conducted by the National Institute for Water and
Atmospheric. Research (NIWA), however, suggest that by the end of the century, warming
over the Southern Alps could be significantly greater than over the rest of the country.

F
Sea levels around New Zealand have risen by 25cm since the middle of the 9th century
and by 7 cm since 1990. Predictions for the coming years cover a wide range, however,
partly because of unknown rises resulting from the melting of the ice in the Arctic,
Greenland and Antarctica. In addition, sea level at any given time is affected by many
different factors, one of which is called storm surge. When a Coincides with a high tide
along low lying coastal areas, this bulge raises the tide higher than normal, creating. Surge
not unlike a slow-motion tsunami. Not only does a rise in sea level increase the potential for
his sort damage, but it also has less immediate impacts. The one potentially grave outcome
is that groundwater systems may become contaminated with saltwater, spoiling them for
the irrigation of farmland, which in turn could diminish crop harvests. Similarly, over time,
estuaries may be enlarged by erosion as tidal influences reach further upstream, altering
the contours of whole shorelines and initiating further unforeseen consequences.

G

The impacts these changes will have on New Zealand are difficult to generalize. Human
systems are better able to adapt to change than natural ecosystems because humans can
see a problem coming and plan a response. Farmers and horticulturalists have made
considerable advances, replacing crops they grow to better suit the new conditions.
However, plant breeders will need to show considerable ingenuity if they can overcome the
acute water shortages that are forecast.

H

For natural ecosystems the rate of change is crucial. If it is low, the plants and animals and
fish will be able to ‘keep up’; if it is high, only the most adaptable species-those that can
survive in the widest range of ecological niches-are likely to survive. Species adapted to
only a narrow range of conditions or food sources will find adaptation much more difficult.
Take tuatara, for instance. Their sex is determined by the temperature at which the eggs
are incubated in warm (currently above 22 °C) condition become predominately male – and
now males already outnumber females by nearly two to one in some island refuges. In the
mountains, as the permanent snow line moves upwards, the tolerance zones of some
alpine plants and animals may simply disappear. It should also be remembered that global
warming is just that – a global phenomenon. ‘New Zealand’s own greenhouse emissions
are tiny – around 0.5% of the global total. Even if New Zealanders were to achieve the
government’s target of carbon neutrality, this would have no discernable impact on global
climate change.
I

The changes that global warming is going to bring to New Zealand during the 21st century
are going to be significant, but where the country is likely to be most vulnerable is with
respect to climate change elsewhere. New Zealand may warm more slowly than most
places, but if its major export markets undergo damaging change, the economic impact will
be severe.

Questions 1-6

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write your answers in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.

1. What is the main idea of the first paragraph?

A The air condition in New Zealand will maintain a high quality because of the ocean

B The Southern Ocean will remain at a constant strength
C The continents will warm more than the point

D New Zealand will not warm as much as other countries in the next century because it is
surrounded by sea.

2. What does the writer say about New Zealand’s variable weather?

A Temperature changes of 1°C will not be seem important in future

B Variable weather will continue, unchanged by global warming

C There was an unusually small amount of variation in 2006-2007

D Summer temperatures will vary but winter ones will be consistent

3. What is the predicted impact of conditions in the ocean to the south of New Zealand?

A New Zealand will be more affected by floods and droughts
B Antarctica will not be adversely affected by warming.

C The band of west winds will move further to the south.

D The usual west wind will no longer be reliable

4. The writer mentions ‘moisture deficit’ to show?

A The droughts will be shorter but more severe

B How the growing season will become longer.

C How growing conditions will deteriorate

D That farmers should alter the make-up of soils
5. What are the implications of global warming for New Zealand’s

A Skiing may move to lower the altitude in future.

B The ski season will be later in the year than at present.

C The northern ski field will have to move to the south

D Warming may provide more snow for some ski locations

6. The writer refers to NIWA’s latest studies in the 3rd paragraph to show
A how a particular place could be affected by warming

B that the warming trend has been intensifying since 1978

C that freezing levels will rise throughout the century

D how the growth of glaciers is likely to cause damage


Questions 7-9

Complete the summary below.

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 7-9 on your answer sheet.
Rising sea levels

The extent of future sea level rises around New Zealand is uncertain and may be
determined in the 7...................... Another variable is sudden rises in sea level caused by
bad weather. Higher sea levels can lead to reduced 8..................... and result in changes to
the shape of 9......................

A agriculture production
B tropical waters

C tidal waves

D polar regions

E global warming

F coastal land

G high tides


Questions 10-14

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?

In boxes 10-14 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement is true

NO if the statement is false

NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage
10..................... The natural world is less responsive to challenges than humans.

11..................... The agricultural sector is being too conservative and resistant to
innovation.

12..................... The global warming is slow; it will affect different regions in different
ways.

13..................... The tuatara is vulnerable to changes in climate conditions.

14..................... New Zealand must reduce carbon emission if global warming is to be
slowed.

Solution:

1. D 8. A
2. B 9. F

3. A 10. YES
4. C 11. NOT GIVEN

5. D 12. NOT GIVEN
6. A 13. YES

7. D 14. NO
