TITLE: Global warming: Prevent poles from melting
INDEX: 183
============================================================

Global warming: Prevent poles from melting

A. Such is our dependence on fossil fuels, and such the volume of carbon dioxide we have
already released into the atmosphere, that most climate scientists agree that significant
global warming is now inevitable – the best we can hope to do is keep it at a reasonable
level, and even that going to be an uphill task.

At present, the only serious option on the table for doing this is cutting back on our carbon
emissions, but a few countries are making major strides in this regard, the majority are
having great difficulty even stemming the rate of increase, let alone reversing
Consequently, an increasing number of scientists are beginning to explore the alternatives.

They under the banner of geoengineering generally defined as the intentional large-scale
manipulation of the environment.


B. Geoengineering has been shown to work, at least on a small, localised scale, for
decades. May Day parades in Moscow have taken place under clear blue skies, aircraft
having deposited dry ice, silver iodide (m $1) and cement powder to disperse clouds. Many
of the schemes now suggested look to do the opposite, and reduce the amount of sunlight
reaching the planet.

One scheme focuses on achieving a general cooling of the Earth and involves the concept
of releasing aerosol sprays into the stratosphere above the Arctic to create clouds of
sulphur dioxide, which would, in turn, lead to a global dimming. The idea is modelled on
historical volcanic explosions, such as that of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines in 1991;
which led to a short-term cooling of global temperatures by 0.5°c. The aerosols could be
delivered by artillery, high-flying aircraft or balloons.


C. Instead of concentrating on global cooling, other schemes look specifically at reversing
the melting at the poles. One idea is to bolster an ice cap by spraying it with water. Using
pumps to carry water from below the sea ice the spray would come out as snow or ice
particles, producing thicker sea ice with a higher albedo (the ratio of sunlight reflected from
a surface) to reflect summer radiation. Scientists have also scrutinised whether it is
possible to block iceflow in Greenland with cables which have been reinforced, preventing
icebergs from moving into the sea.

Veil Albert Kallio, a Finnish scientist, says that such an idea is impractical, because the
force of the ice would ultimately snap the cables and rapidly release a large quantity of
frozen ice into the sea. However, Kallio believes that the sort of cables used in suspension
bridges could potentially be used to divert, rather than halt, the southward movement of ice
from Spitsbergen. It would stop the ice moving south, and local currents would see them
float northwards’ he says.


D. A number of geoengineering ideas are currently being examined in the Russian Arctic.
These include planting millions of birch trees: the thinking, according to Kallio, is that their
white bark would increase the amount of reflected sunlight. The loss of their leaves in
winter would also enable the snow to reflect radiation. In contrast, the native evergreen
pines tend to shade the snow and absorb radiation.

Using ice-breaking vessels to deliberately break up and scatter coastal sea ice in both
Arctic and Antarctic waters in their respective autumns, and diverting Russian rivers to
increase cold-water flow to ice-forming areas, could also be used to slow down warming,
Kallio says. 1 You would need the wind to blow the right way, but in the right conditions, by
letting ice float free and head north, you would enhance ice growth.’


E. But will such ideas ever be implemented? The major counter-arguments to
geoengineering schemes are, first, that they are a ‘cop-out’ that allow US to continue living
the way we do, rather than reducing carbon emissions; and, second, even if they do work,
would the side-effects outweigh the advantages? Then there’s the daunting prospect of
upkeep and repair of any scheme as well as the consequences of a technical failure. ‘I
think all of US agree that if we were to end geoengineering on a given day, then the planet
would return to its pre-engineered condition very rapidly, and probably within 10 to 20
years’ says Dr Phil Rasch, chief scientist for climate change at the US-based Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory.

That’s certainly something to worry about. I would consider geoengineering as a strategy to
employ only we manage the conversion to a non-fossil- fuel economy. ‘The risk with
geoengineering projects is that you can “overshoot”,’ says Dr Dan hunt, from the University
of Bristol. ‘You may bring global temperatures back to pre-industrial levels, but the risk is
that the poles will still be warmer than they should be and the tropics be cooler than before
industrialization.’


F. The main reason why geoengineering is countenanced by the mainstream scientific
community is that most researchers have little faith in the of politicians to agree – and then
bring in the necessary carbon cuts. Even leading conservation organisations believe the
subject worth exploring. As Dr Martin Sommerkorn, a climate change advisor says.’

But human-induced climate change has brought humanity to a position where it important
not to exclude thinking thoroughly about this topic and its possibilities despite the potential
drawbacks. If, over the coming years, the science US about an ever-increased climate
sensitivity of the planet and this isn’t unrealistic – then we may be best served by not
having to start our thinking from scratch.

Questions 14-18

Reading Passage has six paragraphs, A-F
Which paragraph contains the following information?
Write the correct letter, A-F, in boxes 14-18 on your answer sheet You may use any letter
more than once.
14..................... the existence of geoengineering projects distracting from the real task of
changing the way we live
15..................... circumstances in which geoengineering has demonstrated success
16..................... Frustrating maintenance problems associated with geoengineering
projects
17..................... support for geoengineering being due to a lack of confidence in
governments
18..................... more success in fighting climate change in some parts of the world than
others


Questions 19-23

Complete the summary below.
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 19-23 on your answer sheet.


Geoengineering projects


A range of geoengineering ideas has been put forward, which aim either to prevent the
melting of the ice caps or to stop the general rise in global temperatures. One scheme to
discourage the melting of ice and snow involves introducing 19..................... to the Arctic
because of their colour. The build-up of ice could be encouraged by dispersing ice along
the coasts using special ships and changing the direction of some 20..................... but this
scheme is dependent on certain weather conditions. Another way of increasing the amount
of ice involves using 21..................... to bring water to the surface. A scheme to stop ice
moving would apply 22......................but this method is more likely to be successful in
preventing the ice from travelling in one direction rather than stopping it altogether. A
suggestion for cooling global temperatures is based on what has happened in the past after
23..................... and it involves creating clouds of gas.


Questions 24-26

Look at the following people (Questions 24-26) and the list of opinions below.
Match each person with the correct opinion, A-E.
Write the correct letter, A-E, in boxes 24-26 on your answer sheet.


24..................... Phil Rasch
25..................... DanLunt
26..................... Martin Sommerkorn
List of opinions
A. The problems of geoengineering shouldn’t mean that ideas are not seriously considered.
B. Some geoengineering projects are more likely to succeed than others,
C. Geoengineering only offers a short-term relief.
D. A positive outcome of geoengineering may have a negative consequence elsewhere.

E. Most geoengineering projects aren’t clear in what they are aiming at.

Solution:

1. E 8. pumps
2. B 9. cables

3. E 10. volcanic explosions
4. F 11. C

5. A 12. D
6. birch trees 13. A

7. Russian rivers
