TITLE: Glow-worms
INDEX: 184
============================================================

Glow-worms

A
The glow-worm belongs to a family of beetles known as the Lampyridae or fireflies. The
fireflies are a huge group containing over 2000 species, with new ones being discovered all
the time. The feature which makes fireflies and glow-worms so appealing is their ability to
produce an often dazzling display of light. The light is used by the adult fireflies as a signal
to attract a mate, and each species must develop its own 'call-sign' to avoid being confused
with other species glowing nearby. So within any one area each species will differ from its
neighbours in some way, for example in the colour or pattern of its light, how long the
pulses of light last, the interval between pulses and whether it displays in flight or from the
ground.

B
The firefly’s almost magical light has attracted human attention for generations. It is
described in an ancient Chinese encyclopaedia written over 2000 years ago by a pupil of
Confucius. Fireflies often featured in Japanese and Arabian folk medicine. All over the
world they have been the inspiration for countless poems, paintings and stories. In Britain,
for example, there are plenty of anecdotes describing how glow-worms have been used to
read by or used as emergency bicycle lamps when a cyclist's batteries have failed without
warning. Early travellers in the New World came back with similar stories, of how the native
people of Central America would collect a type of click beetle and release them indoors to
light up their huts. Girls threaded them around their feet to illuminate the forest paths at
night.

Fireflies very similar to those we see today have been found fossilised in rocks which were
formed about 30 million years ago, and their ancestors were probably glowing long before
then. It is impossible to be sure exactly when and where the first firefly appeared. The
highest concentrations of firefly species today are to be found in the tropics of South

America, which may mean either that this is where they first evolved, or simply that they
prefer the conditions there.

Wherever they first arose, fireflies have since spread to almost every part of the globe.
Today members of the firefly family can be found almost anywhere outside the Arctic and
Antarctic circles.

C
As with many insects, the glow-worm's life is divided into four distinct stages: the egg, the
larva (equivalent to the caterpillar of a butterfly), the pupa (or chrysalis) and the adult. The
glow-worm begins its life in the autumn as a pale yellow egg. The freshly laid egg is
extremely fragile but within a day its surface has hardened into a shell. The egg usually
takes about 35 days to hatch, but the exact time varies according to the temperature, from
about 27 days in hot weather to more than 45 days in cold weather. By the time it is due to
hatch, the glow-worm's light organ is fully developed, and its glow signals that the egg will
soon hatch.

After it has left the egg, the larva slowly grows from a few millimetres into the size and
shape of a matchstick. The larval stage is the only time the insect can feed. The larva
devotes much of its life to feeding and building up its food reserves so that as an adult it will
be free to concentrate all its efforts on the task of finding a mate and reproducing.
Throughout its time as a larva, approximately 15 months, the glow-worm emits a bright
light. The larva's light is much fainter than the adult female's but it can still be seen more
than five metres away.


In the final stage of a glow-worm's life, the larva encases itself in a pupa) skin while it
changes from the simple larva to the more complex adult fly. When the adult fly emerges
from the pupa the male seeks a female with whom it can mate. After mating, the female
lays about 120 eggs. The adult flies have no mouth parts, cannot eat and therefore only
live a few days. When people talk of seeing a glow-worm they normally mean the brightly
glowing adult female.

D
In some countries the numbers of glow-worms have been falling. Evidence suggests that
there has been a steady decrease in the British glow-worm population since the 1950s and
possibly before that. Possible causes for the decline include habitat destruction, pollution
and changes in climate. Thousands of acres of grassland have been built upon and glow-
worm sites have become increasingly isolated from each other. The widespread use of
pesticides and fertilisers may also have endangered the glow-worm. Being at the top of a
food chain it is likely to absorb any pollutants eaten by the snails on which it feeds. The
effect of global warming on rainfall and other weather patterns may also be playing a part in
the disappearance of glow-worms. A lot more research will be needed, however, before the
causes of the glow-worm's gradual decline are clear.

E
Although glow-worms are found wherever conditions are damp, food is in good supply and
there is an over-hanging wall, they are most spectacular in caves. For more than 100 years
the glow-worm caves in New Zealand have attracted millions of people from all over the
world. The caves were first explored in 1887 by a local Maori chief, Tane Tinorau, and an
English surveyor, Fred Mace. They built a raft and, with candles as their only light, they
floated into the cave where the stream goes underground. As their eyes adjusted to the
darkness they saw myriad lights reflecting off the water. Looking up they discovered that
the ceiling was dotted with the lights of thousands of glow-worms. They returned many
times to explore further, and on an independent trip Tane discovered the upper level of the
cave and an easier access. The authorities were advised and government surveyors
mapped the caves. By 1888 Tane Tinorau had opened the cave to tourists.

Questions 1-6

The reading passage has five sections labelled A-E.

Which section contains the following information?

Write the correct letter A-E in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.


NB You may use any letter more than once.

1..................... threats to the glow-worm
2..................... ways in which glow-worms have been used
3..................... variations in type of glow-worm
4..................... glow-worm distribution

5..................... glow-worms becoming an attraction
6..................... the life-cycle of a glow-worm


Questions 7-13

Do the following statements agree with the information given in the reading passage.

In boxes 7-13 on your answer sheet, write
TRUE if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVENiif there is no information on this


7..................... Scientists have only recently been able to list the exact number of glow-
worm species.

8..................... The first fireflies appeared 30 million years ago.
9..................... Glow-worm populations are decreasing faster in some countries than in
others.
10..................... Heat affects the production of glow-worm larvae.

11..................... Adulthood is the longest stage of a glow-worm's life.
12..................... The exact reason why glow-worm numbers are decreasing is unknown.
13..................... Glow-worms are usually found in wet areas.

Solution:

1. D 8. FALSE
2. B 9. NOT GIVEN

3. A 10. TRUE
4. B 11. FALSE

5. E 12. TRUE
6. C 13. TRUE

7. NOT GIVEN
R eading Practice

Going nowhere fast

New transport mode PRT RUF

A. This is ludicrous! We can talk to people anywhere in the world or fly to meet them in a
few hours. We can even send probes to other planets. But when it comes to getting
around our cities, we depend on systems that have scarcely changed since the days
of Gottlieb Daimler
B. In recent years, the pollution belched out by millions of vehicles has dominated the
debate about transport. The problem has even persuaded California, home of car
culture, to curb traffic growth. But no matter how green they become, cars are unlikely
to get us around crowded cities any faster. And persuading people to use trains and
buses will always be an uphill struggle. Cars, after all, are popular for very good
reasons, as anyone with small children or heavy shopping knows.
C. A professor of mechanical engineering sits typing at a computer keyboard, conjuring
up a scene on his monitor that looks something like the classic computer game

PacMan.White dots stream in from the right of the screen, switch to red, and merge
with green boxes, which swiftly change color to yellow and then red while moving
through a bewildering maze. But this is not a video game.J.Edward Anderson of
Boston University is testing an urban transit system that he believes could
revolutionize public transport worldwide.
D. For the past quarter of a century, Anderson has been promoting his version of
personal rapid transit(PRT). Other versions came and went in the 1970s, From
Europe, Japan, and elsewhere in the Us, but he was so convinced of the idea’s
potential that he stuck with it and, in 1983, founded the Taxi 2000 Corporation to
‘commercialize the initiative. Although the University of Minnesota, Anderson’s
employer until 1986, holds the patents to the technology, he is licensed to develop it
and to sub-license other developers. So politicians should be trying to lure people out
of their cars, not forcing them out. There’s certainly no shortage of alternatives.

Perhaps the most attractive is the concept known as personal rapid transit(PRT),
independently invented in the US and Europe in the 1950s.
E. The idea is to go to one of many stations and hop into a computer-controlled car that
can whisk you to your destination along with a network of guideways. You wouldn’t
have to share your space with strangers, and with no traffic lights, pedestrians, or
parked cars to slow things down, PRT guideways can carry far more traffic, nonstop,
than any inner-city road. It’s a wonderful vision, but the odds are stacked against PRT
for a number of reasons. The first cars ran on existing roads, and it was only after
they became popular-and after governments started earning revenue from them- that
a road network designed specifically for motor vehicles was built. With PRT, the
fracture would have to come first-and that would cost megabucks.
F. What’s more, any transport system that threatened the car’s dominance would be up
against all those with a stake in maintaining the status quo, from private car owners to
manufacturers and oil multinationals. Even if PRTs were spectacularly successful in
trials, it might not make much difference. Superior technology doesn’t always triumph,


Access http://mini-ielts.com for more practices 1
as the VHS versus Betamax and windows versus Apple Mac battles showed.
G. But “dual-mode” systems might just succeed where PRT seems doomed to fail. The

Danish RUF system envisaged by Palle Jensen, for example, resembles PRT but
with one key difference: vehicles have wheels as well as a slot allowing them to travel
on a monorail, so they can drive off the rail onto a normal road. Once on a road, the
occupant would take over from the computer, and the Ruf vehicle-the term comes
from a Danish saying meaning to “go fast”-would become an electric car.
H. Build a fast network of guideways in a busy city center and people would have a
strong incentive not just to use public Ruf vehicles, but also to buy their own dual-
mode vehicle. Commuters could drive onto the guideway, sit back, and read as they
are chauffeured into the city. At work they would jump out, leaving their vehicles to
park themselves. Unlike PRT, such a system could grow organically, as each network
would serve a large area around it and people nearby could buy into it. And a dual-
mode system might even win the support of car manufacturers, who could easily
switch to producing dual-mode vehicles.

I. The RUF system can reduce energy consumption from individual traffic. The main
factor is the reduction of air resistance due to the close coupling of vehicles. The
energy consumption per Ruf can is reduced to less than 1/3 at 100 km/h. Since RUF is
an electric system, renewable sources can be used without problems. A combination
of windmills and a RUF rail could be used over water. Solar cells can also be
integrated into the system and ensure completely sustainable transportation.
J. Of Course, creating a new transport system will not be cheap or easy. But unlike
adding a dedicated bus lane here or extending the underground railway there, an
innovative system such as Jensen’s could transform cities. The vehicles in a RUF
system rides” very safely on top of a triangular monorail. This means that derailments
are impossible and that the users will feel safe because it is easy to understand that
when the rail is actually inside the vehicle it is absolutely stable. The special rail brake
ensures that braking power is always available even during bad weather. The brake
can squeeze as hard against the rail as required in order to bring the vehicle to a safe
stop. If a vehicle has to be evacuated, a walkway between the two rails can be used.
K. And it’s not just a matter of saving a few minutes a day. According to the Red Cross,
more than 30 million people have died in road accidents in the past century-three
times the number killed in the First World War-and the annual death toll is rising. and
what’s more the Red Cross believes road accidents will become the third biggest
cause of death and disability by 2020, ahead of diseases such as AIDS and
tuberculosis. Surely we can find a better way to get around.

Questions 1-4

In boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet, write

True If the statement is true


False If the statement is false

Not Given If the information is not given in the passage

1..................... City transport developed slower than other means of communication


2..................... Many states in the US consider reducing cars growth

3..................... Car pollution has been a concern these days


4..................... Trains and buses are not suitable to drive on an uphill road


Questions 5-11

Use the information in the passage to match the category (listed A-C) with the
description below. Write the appropriate letters A-C in boxes 5-11 on your answer
sheet.
[A] ONLY PRT

[B] ONLY RUF
[C] BOTH OF THEM

5..................... Totally apply computer system

6..................... Opposition to a system from companies

7..................... Reach destination fast

8..................... Not necessary to share with the public

9..................... Work on the existing road

10..................... Individuals can buy cars after all

11..................... Controlled both by computer and manual


Questions 12-14

Choose Three correct letters from the following that are advantages of developing
a NEW TRANSPORT SYSTEM:

Write your answers in boxes 12-14 on your answer sheet.
A Stimulating economy
B Successful application in Europe
C Safety consideration

D Less pollution to the environment

E Economical budget
F Public popularity

G Fast speed

Solution:

1. TRUE 8. C
2. NOT GIVEN 9. B

3. TRUE 10. B
4. NOT GIVEN 11. B

5. A 12. C
6. A 13. D

7. C 14. G
