TITLE: Gold dusters
INDEX: 185
============================================================

Gold dusters

A Row upon row, tomato plants stand in formation inside a greenhouse. To reproduce,
most flowering plants depend on a third party to transfer pollen between their male and
female parts. Some require extra encouragement to give up that golden dust. The tomato
flower, for example, needs a violent shake, a vibration roughly equivalent to 30 times the
pull of Earth’s gravity, explains Arizona entomologist Stephen Buchmann. Growers have
tried numerous ways to rattle pollen from tomato blossoms. They have used shaking
tables, air blowers and blasts of sound. But natural means seem to work better.
B It is no surprise that nature’s design works best. What’s astonishing is the array of
workers that do it: more than 200,000 individual animal species, by varying strategies, help
the world's 240,000 species of flowering plants make more flowers. Flies and beetles are
the original pollinators, going back to when flowering plants first appeared 130 million years
ago. As for bees, scientists have identified some 20,000 distinct species so far.
Hummingbirds, butterflies, moths, wasps and ants are also up to the job. Even non-flying
mammals do their part: sugar-loving opossums, some rainforest monkeys, and lemurs in
Madagascar, all with nimble hands that tear open flower stalks and furry coats to which
pollen sticks. Most surprising, some lizards, such as geckos, lap up nectar and pollen and
then transport the stuff on their faces and feet as they forage onward.

C All that messy diversity, unfortunately, is not well suited to the monocrops and mega-
yields of modern commercial farmers Before farms got so big, says conservation biologist

Claire Kremen of the University of California, Berkeley, ‘we didn’t have to manage
pollinators. They were all around because of the diverse landscapes. Now you need to
bring in an army to get pollination done. The European honeybee was first imported to the
US some 400 years ago.

Now at least a hundred commercial crops rely almost entirely on managed honeybees,
which beekeepers raise and rent out to tend to big farms. And although other species of
bees are five to ten times more efficient, on a per-bee basis, at pollinating certain fruits,
honeybees have bigger colonies, cover longer distances, and tolerate management and
movement better than most insects. They're not picky - they’ll spend their time on almost
any crop. It’s tricky to calculate what their work is truly worth; some economists put it at
more than $200 billion globally a year.

D Industrial-scale farming, however, may be wearing down the system. Honeybees have
suffered diseases and parasite infestations for as long as they've been managed, but in
2006 came an extreme blow.

Around the world, bees began to disappear over the winter in massive numbers.
Beekeepers would lift the lid of a hive and be amazed to find only the queen and a few
stragglers, the worker bees gone.
In the US, a third to half of all hives crashed; some beekeepers reported colony losses near

90 percent. The mysterious culprit was named colony collapse disorder (CCD) and it
remains an annual menace - and an enigma.

E When it first hit, many people, from agronomists to the public, assumed that our
slathering of chemicals on agricultural fields was to blame for the mystery. Indeed, says
Jeff Pettis of the USDA Bee Research Laboratory, ‘we do find more disease in bees that
have been exposed to pesticides, even at low levels.’ But it is likely that CCD involves
multiple stressors. Poor nutrition and chemical exposure, for instance, might wear down a
bee's immunities before a virus finishes the insect off. It’s hard to tease apart factors and
outcomes, Pettis says. New studies reveal that fungicides - not previously thought toxic to
bees - can interfere with microbes that break down pollen in the insects’ guts, affecting
nutrient absorption and thus long-term health and longevity. Some findings pointed to viral
and fungal pathogens working together. ‘I only wish we had a single agent causing all the
declines,’ Pettis says, ’that would make our work much easier!

F However, habitat loss and alteration, he says, are even more of a menace to pollinators
than pathogens. Claire Kremen encourages farmers to cultivate the flora surrounding
farmland to help solve habitat problems. ‘You can't move the farm,’ she says, ‘but you can
diversify what grows in its vicinity: along roads, even in tractor yards.’ Planting hedgerows
and patches of native flowers that bloom at different times and seeding fields with multiple
plant species rather than monocrops 'not only is better for native pollinators, but it’s just
better agriculture,’ she says. Pesticide-free wildflower havens, adds Buchmann, would also
bolster populations of useful insects. Fortunately, too, ‘there are far more generalist plants
than specialist plants, so there's a lot of redundancy in pollination,’ Buchmann says. ‘Even
if one pollinator drops out, there are often pretty good surrogates left to do the job. The key
to keeping our gardens growing strong, he says, is letting that diversity thrive.

G Take away that variety, and we'll lose more than honey. ‘We wouldn't starve,’ says
Kremen. ‘But what we eat, and even what we wear pollinators, after all, give us some of our
cotton and flax - would be limited to crops whose pollen travels by other means. ‘In a
sense,’ she says, ‘our lives would be dictated by the wind. It’s vital that we give pollinators
more of what they need and less of what they don't, and ease the burden on managed
bees by letting native animals do their part, say scientists.

Adapted from National Geograptiic Magazine.

Questions 1-7

The reading passage has seven sections, A-G.

Choose the correct heading for each section from the list of headings below.


List of Headings
i Looking for clues
ii Blaming the beekeepers
iii Solutions to a more troublesome issue
iv Discovering a new bee species
v An impossible task for any human
vi The preferred pollinator
vii Plant features designed to suit the pollinator
viii Some obvious and less obvious pollen carriers
ix The undesirable alternative
x An unexpected setback


1 Section A 1.....................

2 Section B 2.....................

3 Section C 3.....................

4 Section D 4.....................

5 Section E 5.....................
6 Section F 6.....................

7 Section G 7.....................


Questions 8-11

Complete the sentences below.
Choose NO MOKE THAN THREE WORDS from the passage for each answer.

8 Both 8..................... were the first creatures to pollinate the world's plants.

9 Monkeys transport pollen on their 9.....................

10 Honeybees are favoured pollinators among bee species partly because they travel
10.....................

11 A feature of CCD is often the loss of all the 11.....................


Questions 12-13

Choose TWO letters, A-E.

Which TWO methods of combating the problems caused by CCD and habitat loss are
mentioned in the article?

A using more imported pest controllers

B removing microbes from bees’ stomachs

C cultivating a wide range of flowering plants

D increasing the size of many farms
E placing less reliance on honeybees

Solution:

1. v 8. flies and beetles
2. viii 9. furry coats

3. vi 10. longer distances
4. x 11. worker bees

5. i 12. C OR E IN EITHER ORDER
6. iii 13. C OR E IN EITHER ORDER

7. ix
R eading Practice

GRAVITY

A. Without forces of gravitation, Earth and other planets would be unable to stay in their
orbits around the Sun. the Moon would be unable to orbit the Earth, tidal waves would not
occur and the rising of hot air or water convection would be impossible. Gravitation is a
phenomenon winch allows objects to attract other matter; the physics behind it have been
explained in The Theory of Relativity and Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation; though
attempts to explain gravity hail back to ancient times. In 4th Century B.C. the Greek
philosopher Aristotle developed the hypothesis that all objects were drawn into their correct
position by crystalline spheres and that a physical mass would fall towards the earth in
direct proportion to its weight.

B. In the late 16th century Galileo deduced that while gravitation propels all objects to the
ground at the same rate, air resistance resulted in heavier objects appearing to fall more
quickly; his theories contradicting earlier belief systems put in place by Aristotle and others;
so paving the way for formulation of the modern theories of today. Though the two terms
are now used interchangeably in layman use, strictly by scientific definition, there are
distinct differences between ‘gravitation’ and ‘gravity’. The first relates to the influence
exerted by different objects which allow them to attract other objects, whereas ‘gravity’
refers specifically to the force possessed by such objects which facilitates gravitation.

Certain scientific theories hold that gravitation may be initiated by a combination of factors
and not simply the existence of gravity alone; though doubts have been raised regarding
some of these theories.

C. Gravity is directly proportional to mass; a smaller object possessing less gravity. To
illustrate, the Moon is a quarter of the Earth’s size and possesses only 1/6 of its gravity.
The mass of the Earth itself is not spread out proportionally, being flatter at the poles than
the equator as a result of its rotation; gravity and gravitational pull in different locations
throughout the world also vary. In the 1960s, as a result of research into the worldwide
gravity fields, it was discovered that inexplicably areas around and including the Hudson
Bay area of Canada appeared to possess significantly lower levels of gravity than other
parts of the globe; the reasons for this dissimilarity have since been extensively
investigated resulting in two explanations.

D. The original theory presented attributed this anomaly to activity which occurs 100-200
kilometres below the Earth’s surface within the layer known as the ‘mantle’. The mantle is
comprised of hot molten rock known as magma which flows under the earth’s surface
causing convection currents. These convection currents can result in the lowering of the
continental plates which make up the Earth’s surface, as a result when this occurs, the
mass in that area and its gravity is also reduced. Research findings indicated that such
activity had occurred in the Hudson Bay region.

E. More recently a second conjecture suggested that, in fact, lower levels of gravity in the
area are a result of occurrences during the Ice Age. The Laurentidelcesheet, which
covered most of Canada and the northern tip of the USA until it melted 10,000 years ago, is
thought to have been 3.2 kms thick in most parts and 3.7 kms thick over two areas of
Hudson Bay. The sheer weight of the ice layer weighed down the surface of the earth
below, leaving a deep indentation once it had melted, having caused the area around

Hudson Bay to become thinner as the earth’s surface was pushed to the edges of the
icesheet.

F. Extensive investigation has since been carried out by the Harvard-Smithsonian Center
for Astrophysics using data collected by satellites during the Gravity Recovery and Climate
Experiment (GRACE) between 2002 and 2006. The satellites are placed 220kms apart and
orbit 500kms above Earth. Being extremely sensitive to even minor differences in
gravitational pull of the areas of earth they pass over, as the first satellite enters an area
with decreased gravity it moves slightly away from the earth as the gravitational pull is
reduced and also moves slightly further away from the sister satellite that follows, such
activity allowing scientists to create maps of gravitational fields. The GRACE findings also
allowed scientists to estimate the appearance of Hudson Bay over 10,000 years ago, prior
to the great thaw. The areas possessing the lowest gravity today correlate with the areas
covered in the thickest layers of ice at that time.

G. Researchers now believe that both theories regarding reduced gravity levels in the
Hudson Bay region are accurate and that the area’s characteristics are a result of both
magma activity and the impact of the Laurentidelcesheet. It has been estimated that the
former has resulted in 55-75% of gravity reduction and that pressure resulting from the
latter accounts for 25-45%.

H. The effects of the Laurentidelcesheet are reversible due to the earth layer’s capability to
‘rebound’ in response to removal of the weight which once restricted it. Return to the
original position, however, is an extremely slow process; it is estimated that the area
around Hudson Bay will take a further 5,000 years to recover the altitude it once possessed
prior to the Laurentidelcesheet. The rebound activity in the area is also measurable through
observation of sea levels; unlike the rest of the world, sea levels are not rising in the area
as a result of melting icecaps, but are dropping as the land recovers its previous form

I. Research conducted into the Laurentidelcesheet has significant implications on a global
scale. The increased knowledge of how that particular area has changed over time and the
long-term implications activity in the Ice Age had, pave the way to a better understanding of
how current changes elsewhere will manifest themselves over the long term.

Questions 1-6

Reading Passage has nine paragraphs A-I.

Choose the correct heading for paragraphs B, C and E-H from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number i-x in boxes 26-31 on your answer sheet.


List of Headings
i. Return to previous form
ii. Substantiating a hypothesis
iii. Historic theories
iv. The general rule of gravity and an exception
v. The initial explanation
vi. How proximity to the poles affected Hudson Bay
vi. Scientific definition and contemporary views
viii. Relevance to our future
ix. An alternative view point
x. Consolidating theories


Example Answer


Paragraph D v

Paragraph I vii

1..................... Paragraph B

2..................... Paragraph C

3..................... Paragraph E

4..................... Paragraph F

5..................... Paragraph G

6..................... Paragraph H


Questions 7-11
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?

In boxes 7-11 on your answer sheet write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
7..................... Differentiation between gravity and gravitational pull is generally only made
by academics in the field.

8..................... Gravity levels in areas around the equator are significantly higher than
around the poles.

9..................... It was first believed that lower gravity levels in Hudson Bay could be
attributed to its location between the poles and the equator.

10..................... Molten rock activity within the magma layer has had less of an impact on
gravity levels in the Hudson Bay area than the Laurentidelcesheet.

11..................... The GRACE project’s main focus was areas of Canada and North America
once thought to be covered by the Laurentidelcesheet.


Questions 12-15

Complete the sentences below with words from the box below.

Write the correct letter A-J in boxes 12-15 on your answer sheet.
12. The impact of 12..................... on objects falling to the ground was not considered by

Aristotle.
13. Investigations of 13..................... first led to the discovery of the unusual levels in
Hudson Bay.

14. The earth’s surface has been observed to sink as a direct result of 14.....................

15. The largest proportion of the Laurentideicesheet was 15..................... in depth.

A. crystalline spheres B. mass

C. 3.2kms D. continental plates
E. gravity fields F. warming

G. 3.5kms H. mantle layers

I. convection currents J. air resistance

Solution:

1. vii 9. FALSE
2. iv 10. FALSE

3. ix 11. NOT GIVEN
4. ii 12. J

5. x 13. E
6. i 14. I

7. TRUE 15. C

8. NOT GIVEN
R eading Practice

Great Migrations

Animal migration, however it is defined, is far more than just the movement of animals. It
can loosely be described as travel that takes place at regular intervals - often in an annual
cycle - that may involve many members of a species, and is rewarded only after a long
journey. It suggests inherited instinct. The biologist Hugh Dingle has identified five
characteristics that apply, in varying degrees and combinations, to all migrations. They are
prolonged movements that carry animals outside familiar habitats; they tend to be linear,
not zigzaggy; they involve special behaviours concerning preparation (such as overfeeding)
and arrival; they demand special allocations of energy. And one more: migrating animals
maintain an intense attentiveness to the greater mission, which keeps them undistracted by
temptations and undeterred by challenges that would turn other animals aside.

An arctic tern, on its 20,000 km flight from the extreme south of South America to the Arctic
circle, will take no notice of a nice smelly herring offered from a bird-watcher's boat along
the way. While local gulls will dive voraciously for such handouts, the tern flies on. Why?
The arctic tern resists distraction because it is driven at that moment by an instinctive
sense of something we humans find admirable: larger purpose. In other words, it
is determined to reach its destination. The bird senses that it can eat, rest and mate later.
Right now it is totally focused on the journey; its undivided intent is arrival.

Reaching some gravelly coastline in the Arctic, upon which other arctic terns
have converged, will serve its larger purpose as shaped by evolution: finding a place,
a time, and a set of circumstances in which it can successfully hatch and rear offspring.
But migration is a complex issue, and biologists define it differently, depending in part on
what sorts of animals they study. Joe! Berger, of the University of Montana, who works on
the American pronghorn and other large terrestrial mammals, prefers what he calls a
simple, practical definition suited to his beasts: 'movements from a seasonal home area
away to another home area and back again'. Generally the reason for such seasonal back-
and-forth movement is to seek resources that aren't available within a single area year-
round.

But daily vertical movements by zooplankton in the ocean - upward by night to seek food,
downward by day to escape predators - can also be considered migration. So can the
movement of aphids when, having depleted the young leaves on one food plant, their
offspring then fly onward to a different host plant, with no one aphid ever returning to where
it started.

Dingle is an evolutionary biologist who studies insects. His definition is more intricate than
Berger's, citing those five features that distinguish migration from other forms of movement.
They allow for the fact that, for example, aphids will become sensitive to blue light (from the
sky) when it's time for takeoff on their big journey, and sensitive to yellow light (reflected
from tender young leaves) when it's appropriate to land. Birds will fatten themselves with
heavy feeding in advance of a long migrational flight. The value of his definition, Dingle
argues, is that it focuses attention on what the phenomenon of wildebeest migration shares
with the phenomenon of the aphids, and therefore helps guide researchers
towards understanding how evolution has produced them all.

Human behaviour, however, is having a detrimental impact on animal migration.
The pronghorn, which resembles an antelope, though they are unrelated, is the fastest land
mammal of the New World. One population, which spends the summer in the mountainous
Grand Teton National Park of the western USA, follows a narrow route from its summer
range in the mountains, across a river, and down onto the plains. Here they wait out the
frozen months, feeding mainly on sagebrush blown clear of snow. These pronghorn
are notable for the invariance of their migration route and the severity of its constriction at
three bottlenecks. If they can't pass through each of the three during their spring migration,
they can't reach their bounty of summer grazing; if they can't pass through again in autumn,
escaping south onto those windblown plains, they are likely to die trying to overwinter in
the deep snow. Pronghorn, dependent on distance vision and speed to keep safe
from predators, traverse high, open shoulders of land, where they can see and run. At one
of the bottlenecks, forested hills rise to form a V, leaving a corridor of open ground only
about 150 metres wide, filled with private homes. Increasing development is leading toward
a crisis for the pronghorn, threatening to choke off their passageway.

Conservation scientists, along with some biologists and land managers within the USA's
National Park Service and other agencies, are now working to preserve migrational
behaviours, not just species and habitats. A National Forest has recognised the path of the
pronghorn, much of which passes across its land, as a protected migration corridor. But
neither the Forest Service nor the Park Service can control what happens on private land at
a bottleneck. And with certain other migrating species, the challenge is complicated further
- by vastly greater distances traversed, more jurisdictions, more borders, more dangers
along the way. We will require wisdom and resoluteness to ensure that migrating species
can continue their journeying a while longer.

Questions 1-5

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?

In boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
1..................... Local gulls and migrating arctic terns behave in the same way when
offered food.
2..................... Experts’ definitions of migration tend to vary according to their area of
study.
3..................... Very few experts agree that the movement of aphids can be considered
migration.
4..................... Aphids’ journeys are affected by changes in the light that they perceive.

5..................... Dingles aim is to distinguish between the migratory behaviours of different
species.


Questions 6-9

Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-G, below.
Write the correct letter, A-G. in boxes 6-9 on your answer sheet


A be discouraged by difficulties.
B travel on open land where they can look out for predators.

C eat more than they need for immediate purposes.
D be repeated daily. '

E ignore distractions.
F be governed by the availability of water.

G follow a straight line.


6 According to Dingle, migratory routes are likely to 6.....................

7 To prepare for migration, animals are likely to 7.....................

8 During migration, animals are unlikely to 8.....................

9 Arctic terns illustrate migrating animals’ ability to 9.....................

Questions 10-13

Complete the summary below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet.


The migration of pronghorns

Pronghorns rely on their eyesight and 10..................... to avoid predators. One particular
population’s summer habitat is a national park, and their winter home is on the

11..................... where they go to avoid the danger presented by the snow at that time of
year

However, their route between these two areas contains three 12.....................
One problem is the construction of new homes in a narrow 13..................... of land on
the pronghorns’ route.

Solution:

1. FALSE 8. A
2. TRUE 9. E

3. NOT
10. speed
GIVEN
4. TRUE 11. plains
5. FALSE 12. bottlenecks

6. G 13. corridor/passageway
7. C
R eading Practice

Green virtues of green sand

Revolution in gloss recycling could help keep water clean


A For the past 100 years special high grade white sand dug from the ground at
Leighton Buzzard in the UK. has been used to filter tap water to remove bacteria and
impurities but this may no longer be necessary. A new factory that turns used wine
bottles into green sand could revolutionise the recycling industry and help to filter
Britain’s drinking water. Backed by $1.6m from the European Union and the
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra), a company based in

Scotland is building the factory, which will turn beverage bottles back into the sand
from which they were made in the first place. The green sand has already been
successfully tested by water companies and is being used in 50 swimming pools in
Scotland to keep the water clean.

B The idea is not only to avoid using up an increasingly scarce natural resource,
sand but also to solve a crisis in the recycling industry. Britain uses 5.5m tonnes of
glass a year, but recycles only 750,000 tonnes of it. The problem is that half the
green bottle glass in Britain is originally from imported wine and beer bottles.
Because there is so much of it, and it is used less in domestic production than other
types, green glass is worth only $25 a tonne. Clear glass, which is melted down and
used for whisky bottles, mainly for export, is worth double that amount.

C Howard Drvden. a scientist and managing director of the company. Drvden Aqua,
of Bonnyrigg, near Edinburgh, has spent six years working on the product he calls

Active Filtration Media, or AFM. He concedes that he has given what is basically
recycled glass a ‘fancy name' to remove the stigma of what most people would
regard as an inferior product. He says he needs bottles that have already contained
drinkable liquids to be sure that drinking water filtered through the AFM would not
be contaminated. Crushed down beverage glass has fewer impurities than real sand
and it performed better in trials. *The fact is that tests show that AFM does the job
better than sand, it is easier to clean and reuse and has all sorts of properties that make it
ideal for other applications.' he claimed.

D The factory is designed to produce 100 tonnes of AFM a day, although Mr Dryden
regards this as a large-scale pilot project rather than full production. Current
estimates of the UK market for this glass for filtering drinking water, sewage,
industrial water, swimming pools and fish farming are between 175.000 to 217.000
tonnes a year, which w ill use up most of the glass available near the factory. So he
intends to build five or six factories in cities where there are large quantities of
bottles, in order to cut down on transport costs.

E The current factory will be completed this month and is expected to go into full
production on January 14th next year. Once it is providing a ‘regular’ product, the
government’s drinking water inspectorate will be asked to perform tests and
approve it for widespread use by water companies. A Defra spokesman said it was
hoped that AFM could meet approval within six months. The only problem that they
could foresee was possible contamination if some glass came from sources other
than beverage bottles.
F Among those who have tested the glass already is Caroline Fitzpatrick of the civil
and environmental engineering department of University College London. ‘We have
looked at a number of batches and it appears to do the job.' she said. ‘Basically,
sand is made of glass and Mr Dryden is turning bottles back into sand. It seems a
straightforward idea and there is no reason we can think of why it would not work.

Since glass from wine bottles and other beverages has no impurities and clearly did
not leach any substances into the contents of the bottles, there was no reason to
believe there would be a problem,’ Dr Fitzpatrick added.

G Mr Dryden has set up a network of agents round the world to sell AFM. It is already
in use in central America to filter water on banana plantations where the fruit has to
he washed before being despatched to European markets. It is also in use in sewage
works to filter water before it is returned to rivers, something which is becoming
legally necessary across the European Union because of tighter regulations on
sewage works. So there are a great number of applications involving cleaning up
water. Currently, however, AFM costs $670 a tonne, about four times as much as
good quality sand. ‘Hut that is because we haven't got large-scale production.

Obviously, when we get going it will cost a lot less, and be competitive with sand in
price as well.’ Mr Dryden said. ‘I believe it performs better and lasts longer than
sand, so it is going to be better value too.'

H If AFM takes off as a product it will be a big boost for the government agency
which is charged with finding a market for recycled products. Crushed glass is
already being used in road surfacing and in making tiles and bricks. Similarly. AFM
could prove to have a widespread use and give green glass a cash value.

Questions 1-10

Reading Passage 1 has 8 paragraphs labelled A-H Which paragraph contains the following
information?

Write the correct letter A-H in boxes 1-10 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.

1..................... a description of plans to expand production of AFM

2..................... the identification of a potential danger in the raw material for AFM

3..................... an example of AFM use in the export market
4..................... a comparison of the value of green glass and other types of glass

5..................... a list of potential applications of AFM in the domestic market

6..................... the conclusions drawn from laboratory checks on the process of AFM
production

7..................... identification of current funding for the production of green sand

8..................... an explanation of the chosen brand name for crushed green glass

9..................... a description of plans for exporting AFM

10..................... a description of what has to happen before AFM is accepted for
general use


Questions 11-14

Complete the summary below.

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 11-14 on your answer sheet.


Green sand

The use of crushed green glass (AFM) may have two significant impacts: it may help
to save a diminishing 11..................... while at the same time solving a major problem for
the 12..................... in the UK. However, according to Howard Dryden, only glass from
bottles that have been used for 13..................... can be used in the production process.
AFM is more effective than 14..................... as a water filter, and also has other uses.

Solution:

1. D 8. C
2. E 9. G

3. G 10. E
4. B 11. natural resource

5. D 12. recycling industry
6. F 13. drinkable liquids/ beverages

7. A 14. (real) sand
R eading Practice

Green Wave Washes Over Mainstream Shopping

Research in Britain has shown that green consumers' continue to flourish as a significant
group amongst shoppers. This suggests that politicians who claim environmentalism is
yesterday's issue may be seriously misjudging the public mood.

A report from Mintel, the market research organisation, says that despite recession and
financial pressures, more people than ever want to buy environmentally friendly products
and a 'green wave' has swept through consumerism, taking in people previously untouched
by environmental concerns. The recently published report also predicts that the process will
repeat itself with 'ethical' concerns, involving issues such as fair trade with the Third World
and the social record of businesses. Companies will have to be more honest and open in
response to this mood.

Mintel's survey, based on nearly 1,000 consumers, found that the proportion who look for
green products and are prepared to pay more for them has climbed from 53 per cent in
1990 to around 60 per cent in 1994. On average, they will pay 13 per cent more for such
products, although this percentage is higher among women, managerial and professional
groups and those aged 35 to 44.

Between 1990 and 1994 the proportion of consumers claiming to be unaware of or
unconcerned about green issues fell from 18 to 10 per cent but the number of green
spenders among older people and manual workers has risen substantially. Regions such
as Scotland have also caught up with the south of England in their environmental concerns.
According to Mintel, the image of green consumerism as associated in the past with the
more eccentric members of society has virtually disappeared. The consumer research
manager for Mintel, Angela Hughes, said it had become firmly established as a mainstream
market. She explained that as far as the average person is concerned environmentalism
has not gone off the boil'. In fact, it has spread across a much wider range of consumer
groups, ages and occupations.

Mintel's 1994 survey found that 13 per cent of consumers are 'very dark green', nearly
always buying environmentally friendly products, 28 per cent are 'dark green', trying 'as far
as possible' to buy such products, and 21 per cent are 'pale green' - tending to buy green
products if they see them. Another 26 per cent are 'armchair greens'; they said they care
about environmental issues but their concern does not affect their spending habits. Only 10
per cent say they do not care about green issues.

Four in ten people are 'ethical spenders', buying goods which do not, for example, involve
dealings with oppressive regimes. This figure is the same as in 1990, although the number
of 'armchair ethicals' has risen from 28 to 35 per cent and only 22 per cent say they are
unconcerned now, against 30 per cent in 1990. Hughes claims that in the twenty-first
century, consumers will be encouraged to think more about the entire history of the
products and services they buy, including the policies of the companies that provide them
and that this will require a greater degree of honesty with consumers.

Among green consumers, animal testing is the top issue - 48 per cent said they would be
deterred from buying a product it if had been tested on animals - followed by concerns
regarding irresponsible selling, the ozone layer, river and sea pollution, forest destruction,
recycling and factory farming. However, concern for specific issues is lower than in 1990,
suggesting that many consumers feel that Government and business have taken on the
environmental agenda.

Questions 1-6

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer of Reading Passage ?

In boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet write

YES if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
1..................... The research findings report commercial rather than political trends.

2..................... Being financially better off has made shoppers more sensitive to buying
'green'.

3..................... The majority of shoppers are prepared to pay more for the benefit of the
environment according to the research findings.

4..................... Consumers' green shopping habits are influenced by Mintel's findings.

5..................... Mintel have limited their investigation to professional and managerial
groups.

6..................... Mintel undertakes market surveys on an annual basis.


Questions 7-9

Choose the appropriate letters A-D and write them in boxes 7-9 on your answer sheet.

7 Politicians may have 'misjudged the public mood' because ...

A they are pre-occupied with the recession and financial problems.

B there is more widespread interest in the environment agenda than they anticipated.

C consumer spending has increased significantly as a result of 'green' pressure.

D shoppers are displeased with government policies on a range of issues.


8 What is Mintel?

A an environmentalist group

B a business survey organisation

C an academic research team

D a political organisation


9 A consumer expressing concern for environmental issues without actively supporting
such principles is...

A an 'ethical spender'.

B a 'very dark green' spender.

C an 'armchair green'.

D a 'pale green' spender.


Questions 10-13

Complete the summary using words from the box below.

Write your answers in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet.
NB There are more answers than spaces, so you will not use them all.


The Mintel report suggests that in future companies will be forced to practise greater
10..................... in their dealings because of the increased awareness
amongst 11..................... of ethical issues. This prediction is supported by the growth in
the number of12..................... identified in the most recent survey published. As a
consequence, it is felt that companies will have to think more carefully about
their 13.....................


environmental research armchair ethicals
honesty and openness environmentalists
ethical spenders consumers
politicians political belief social awareness
financial constraints social record

Solution:

1. YES 8. B
2. NO 9. C

10. honesty and
3. YES
openness
4. NOT GIVEN 11. consumers
5. NO 12. armchair ethicals

6. NOT GIVEN 13. social record
7. B
