TITLE: Griffith and American Films
INDEX: 188
============================================================

Griffith and American Films

Movies are key cultural artifacts that offer a window into American cultural and social
history. A mixture of art, business, and popular entertainment, the movies provide a host of
insights into Americans’ shifting ideals, fantasies, and preoccupations

A. Many films of the early silent era dealt with gender relations. Before 1905, as Kathy
Peiss has argued, movie screens were filled with salacious sexual imagery and risque
humor, drawn from burlesque halls and vaudeville theaters. Early films offered many
glimpses of women disrobing or of passionate kisses. As the movies’ female audience
grew, sexual titillation and voyeurism persisted. But an ever increasing number of film dealt
with the changing work and sexual roles of women in a more sophisticated manner. While
D.w. Griffith’s films presented an idealized picture of the frail Victorian child-woman, and
showed an almost obsessive preoccupation with female honor and chastity, other silent
movies presented quite different images of femininity. These ranged from the exotic,
sexually aggressive vamp to the athletic, energetic “serial queen”; the street smart urban
working gal, who repels the sexual advances of her lascivious boss; and cigarette-smoking,
alcohol drinking chorus girls or burlesque queens.

B. In early 1910, director D.w. Griffith was sent by the Biograph Company to the west coast
with his acting troupe, consisting of actors Blanche Sweet, Lillian Gish, Mary Pickford,
Lionel Barrymore, and others. While there, the company decided to explore new territories,
traveling several miles north to Hollywood, a little village that was friendly and enjoyed the
movie company filming there. By focusing the camera on particular actors and actresses,
Griffith inadvertently encouraged the development of the star system. As early as 1910,
newspapers were deluged with requests for actors’ names. But most studios refused to
divulge their identities, fearing the salary demands of popular performers. As one industry
observer put it, “In the ‘star’ your producer gets not only a ‘production’ value…but a
‘trademark’ value, and an ‘insurance’ value which are…very potent in guaranteeing the sale
of this product.” As the star system emerged, salaries soared. In the course of just two
years, the salary of actress Mary Pickford rose from less than $400 a week in 1914 to
$10,000 a week in 1916. This action made Griffith believe the big potential in movie
industry. Thus many competitors completely copy the same system as Griffith used, for the
considerable profits. Additionally, they also study the theory and methods which Griffith
suggested.


C. From the moment America entered the war, Hollywood feared that the industry would be
subject to heavy-handed government censorship. But the government itself wanted no
repeat of World War I, when the Committee on Public Information had whipped up anti-
German hysteria and oversold the war as “a Crusade not merely to re-win the tomb of
Christ, but to bring back to earth the rule of right, the peace, goodwill to men and
gentleness he taught.”

D. The formation of the movie trust ushered in a period of rationalization within the film
industry. Camera and projecting equipment was standardized; film rental fees were fixed;
theaters were upgraded; which improved the quality of movies by removing damaged prints
from cnculation. This was also a period intense artistic and technical innovation, as
pioneering directors like David Wark Griffith and others created a new language of film and
revolutionized screen narrative.

E. With just six months of film experience, Griffith, a former stage actor, was hired as a
director by the Biograph Company and promised $50 a week and one-twentieth of a cent
for every foot of film sold to a rental exchange. Each week, Griffith turned out two or three
one-reelers. While earlier directors had used such cinematic devices as close ups, slow
motion, fade-ins and fade-outs, lighting effects, and editing before, Griffith’s great
contribution to the movie industry was to show how these techniques could be used to
create a wholly new style of storytelling, distinct from the theater. Griffith’s approach to
movie storytelling has been aptly called “photographic realism. “This is not to say that he
merely wished to record a story accurately; rather he sought to convey the illusion of
realism. He demanded that his performers act less in a more lifelike manner, avoiding the
broad, exaggerated gestures and pantomiming of emotions that characterized the
nineteenth century stage. He wanted his performers to take on a role rather than directly
addressing the camera. Above all, he used close-ups, lighting, editing, and other cinematic
techniques convey suspense and other emotions and to focus the audience’s attention on
individual performers.


F. During the 1920s and 1930s, a small group of film companies consolidated then control.
Known as the “Big Five” – Paramount, Warner Brothers, RKO, 20th Century-Fox, and
Lowe’s (MGM) and the “Little Three” – Universal, Columbia, and United Artists, they formed
fully integrated companies. The old film company’s opposition was shocked by new
tycoons. The confusion of tongues in the foreign version of American films deepened when
American directors themselves embarked on the shooting of the new version. They did not
usually speak Spanish (or the given target language) and, at that time, there were only few
translators at the studio’s disposal. For this reason, it was more general to contract Spanish
directors, actors, and screenwriters to produce American films in Spanish for Latin

American audiences and for the public in the Iberian Peninsula. Hollywood had depended
on overseas markets for as much as 40 percent of its revenue. But in an effort to nurture
then own film industries and prevent an excessive outflow of dollars, Britain, France, and
Italy imposed stiff import tariffs and restrictive quotas on imported American movies.


G. A basic problem facing today’s Hollywood is the rapidly rising cost of making and
marketing a movie: an average of $40 million today. The immense cost of producing
movies has led the studios to seek guaranteed hits: blockbuster loaded with high-tech
special effects, sequels, and remakes of earlier movies, foreign films, and even old TV
shows. Hollywood has also sought to cope with rising costs by focusing ever more intently
on its core audiences. Since the mid-1980s, the movie going audience has continued to
decrease in size. Ticket sales fell from 1.2 billion in 1983 to 950 million in 1992, with the
biggest drop occurring among adults. And since over half of Hollywood’s profits are earned
overseas, the target market has to be changed due to the increasing costs and salary of
making a film. The industry has concentrated much of its energy on crude action films
easily understood by an international audience, featuring stars like Arnold Schwarzenegger
and Sylvester Stallone.

Questions 1-6

Reading passage has six paragraphs, A-F.
Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below. Write the
correct number, i-vii, in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.

List of Headings
i. Detailed description for film system
ii. Griffith’s contribution to American films
iii. The gender in development of American film
iv. Change the view of the American movie
V. People’s reaction to making movies in the war period
vi. The increasing market of film in society
vii. Griffith improved the gender recognition in society

1..................... Paragraph A
2..................... Paragraph B

3..................... Paragraph C

4..................... Paragraph D

5..................... Paragraph E

6..................... Paragraph F


Questions 7-10

Use the information in the passage to match the companies (listed A-C) with opinions or
deeds below. Write the appropriate letters A, B, C or D in boxes 7-10 on your answer
sheet

A. old company’s opposition

B. huge drop happens among adults

C. the pressure to change its market

D. completely copy his system


7..................... Griffith’s successful in 1910s, led his rivals

8..................... The growing costs and salary in Hollywood which shows it has
9..................... The increasing new movie industries have a big impact on

10..................... In 1992, ticket sales declined dramatically, due to


Questions 11-13

Choose the correct letter. A, B, C or D. Write your answer in boxes 11-13 on your answer
sheet

11. Why Griffith believe the potential in making movies?

A The gender development in American films

B He used the star system successfully

C He prefer the advanced movie techniques
D He earns lots of money

12. What are other competitors’ reaction to Griffith?

A Adopt Griffith’s theory and methods in making films

B Completely copy his theory and methods

C Try to catch up their innovations

D Find a new system to against Griffith

13. What is the great change in films industries during 1920s and 1930s?

A Try to seek the high-tech special efforts
B Dismiss the needs of overseas audiences

C Changed its goal market

D Improved the foreign version of American movies

Solution:

1. iii 8. C
2. i 9. A

3. v 10. B
4. iv 11. B

5. ii 12. A
6. vi 13. D

7. D
