TITLE: Health in the Wild
INDEX: 192
============================================================

Health in the Wild

A

For the past decade Dr Engel, a lecturer in environmental sciences at Britain’s Open
University, has been collating examples of self-medicating behaviour in wild animals. She
recently published a book on the subject. In a talk at the Edinburgh Science Festival earlier
this month, she explained that the idea that animals can treat themselves has been
regarded with some scepticism by her colleagues in the past. But a growing number of
animal behaviourists now think that wild animals can and do deal with their own medical
needs.

B

One example of self-medication was discovered in 1987. Michael Huffman and Mohamedi
Seifu, working in the Mahale Mountains National Park in Tanzania, noticed that local
chimpanzees suffering from intestinal worms would dose themselves with the pith of a plant
called Veronia. This plant produces poisonous chemicals called terpenes. Its pith contains
a strong enough concentration to kill gut parasites, but not so strong as to kill chimps (nor
people, for that matter; locals use the pith for the same purpose). Given that the plant is
known locally as “goat-killer”, however, it seems that not all animals are as smart as chimps
and humans. Some consume it indiscriminately and succumb.

C

Since the Veronia-eating chimps were discovered, more evidence has emerged suggesting
that animals often eat things for medical rather than nutritional reasons. Many species, for
example, consume dirt a behaviour known as geophagy. Historically, the preferred
explanation was that soil supplies minerals such as salt. But geophagy occurs in areas
where the earth is not a useful source of minerals, and also in places where minerals can
be more easily obtained from certain plants that are known to be rich in them. Clearly, the
animals must be getting something else out of eating earth.

D

The current belief is that soil—and particularly the clay in it—helps to detoxify the defensive
poisons that some plants produce in an attempt to prevent themselves from being eaten.
Evidence for the detoxifying nature of clay came in 1999, from an experiment carried out on
macaws by James Gilardi and his colleagues at the University of California, Davis. Macaws
eat seeds containing alkaloids, a group of chemicals that has some notoriously toxic
members, such as strychnine. In the wild, the birds are frequently seen perched on eroding
riverbanks eating clay. Dr Gilardi fed one group of macaws a mixture of harmless alkaloid
and clay, and a second group just the alkaloid. Several hours later, the macaws that had
eaten the clay had 60% less alkaloid in their bloodstreams than those that had not,
suggesting that the hypothesis is correct.

E

Other observations also support the idea that clay is detoxifying. Towards the tropics, the
amount of toxic compounds in plants increases-and so does the amount of earth eaten by
herbivores. Elephants lick clay from mud holes all year round, except in September when
they are bingeing on fruit which, because it has evolved to be eaten, is not toxic. And the
addition of clay to the diets of domestic cattle increases the amount of nutrients that they
can absorb from their food by 10-20%.

F

A third instance of animal self-medication is the use of mechanical scours to get rid of gut
parasites, in 1972 Richard Wrangham, a researcher at the Gombe Stream Reserve in
Tanzania, noticed that chimpanzees were eating the leaves of a tree called Aspilia. The
chimps chose the leaves carefully by testing them in their mouths. Having chosen a leaf, a
chimp would fold it into a fan and swallow it. Some of the chimps were noticed wrinkling
their noses as they swallowed these leaves, suggesting the experience was unpleasant.
Later, undigested leaves were found on the forest floor.

G
Dr Wrangham rightly guessed that the leaves had a medicinal purpose—this was, indeed,
one of the earliest interpretations of a behaviour pattern as self-medication. However, he
guessed wrong about what the mechanism was. His (and everybody else’s) assumption
was that Aspilia contained a drug, and this sparked more than two decades of
phytochemical research to try to find out what chemical the chimps were after. But by the
1990s, chimps across Africa had been seen swallowing the leaves of 19 different species
that seemed to have few suitable chemicals in common. The drug hypothesis was looking
more and more dubious.

H

It was Dr Huffman who got to the bottom of the problem. He did so by watching what came
out of the chimps, rather than concentrating on what went in. He found that the egested
leaves were full of intestinal worms. The factor common to all 19 species of leaves
swallowed by the chimps was that they were covered with microscopic hooks. These
caught the worms and dragged them from their lodgings.

I

Following that observation, Dr Engel is now particularly excited about how knowledge of
the way that animals look after themselves could be used to improve the health of
livestock. People might also be able to learn a thing or two, and may, indeed, already have
done so. Geophagy, for example, is a common behaviour in many parts of the world. The
medical stalls in African markets frequently sell tablets made of different sorts of clays,
appropriate to different medical conditions.
J

Africans brought to the Americas as slaves continued this tradition, which gave their
owners one more excuse to affect to despise them. Yet, as Dr Engel points out, Rwandan
mountain gorillas eat a type of clay rather similar to kaolinite – the main ingredient of many
patent medicines sold over the counter in the West for digestive complaints. Dirt can
sometimes be good for you, and to be “as sick as a parrot” may, after all, be a state to be
desired.

Questions 1-4

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?

In boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement is true

FALSE if the statement is false

NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage


1..................... It is for 10 years that Dr Engel has been working on animal self-
medication.

2..................... In order to find plants for medication, animals usually need to walk a long
distance.

3..................... Birds such as Macaw, are seen eating clay because it is a part of their
natural diet.

4..................... According to Dr Engel, it is exciting that research into animal self-
medication can be helpful in the invention of new painkillers.


Questions 5-9

Complete the notes below using NO MORE THAN ONE WORD from the passage.
Write your answers in boxes 5-9 on your answer sheet.

Date Name Animal Food Mechanism

Michael Huffman Contained chemicals
5..................... o
1987 and Mohamedi Chimpanzee named 6.....................
f Veronia
Seifu which can kill parasites
Clay
Seeds
James Gilardi and can 8..................... the
1999 Macaw (contain 7...........
his colleagues poisonous contents in
..........) and clay
food
Leaves with Such leaves can catch
1972 Richard WranghamChimpanzee tiny 9..................and expel worms from
... on surface intestines

Questions 10-13
Complete the summary below using words from the box.

Write your answers, A-H, in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet.
Though often doubted, the self-medicating behaviour of animals has been supported by an
increasing amount of evidence. One piece of evidence particularly deals
with 10....................., a soil-consuming behaviour commonly found across animals species,
because the earth, often clay, can neutralize the 11..................... content of their diet. Such
behaviour can also be found among humans in Africa, where people
purchase 12..................... at market stalls as a kind of medication to their illnesses. Another
example of this is found in chimps eating leaves of often 13..................... taste but with no
apparent medicinal value until its unique structure came into light.

A mineral B plants C unpleasant D toxic
E clay tablets F nutritional G geophagy H harmless

Solution:

1. TRUE 8. detoxify
2. NOT GIVEN 9. hooks

3. FALSE 10. G
4. FALSE 11. D

5. pith 12. E
6. terpenes 13. C

7. alkaloids
