TITLE: How Mobile Telephony Turned into a Health Scare
INDEX: 202
============================================================

How Mobile Telephony Turned into a Health Scare

The technology which enabled mobile phones was previously used in the kind of two- way
radio which could be found in taxis and emergency vehicles. Although this was a great
development, it was not really considered mobile telephony because it could not be used to
dial into existing phone networks. It was known as simplex technology, operating on the
same principles as a walkie-talkie, which required that a user press a button, meaning that
only one person at a time could talk. Simplex meant that there was only one
communication frequency in use at any one time.
The first mobile phones to connect to telephone networks were often installed in cars
before the hand-held version came on the market and the revolution in mobile technology
began. The first generation of mobile phones (called 1G) were large, heavy and analogue
and it was not until the invention of the second generation (2G) in the 1990s that digital
networks could be used. The digital element enabled faster signalling. At the same time,
developments in battery design and energy-saving electronics allowed the phones
themselves to become smaller and therefore more truly mobile. The second generation
allowed for text messaging too, and this began with the first person-to-person text message
in Finland in 1993, although a machine-generated text message had been successfully
sent two years earlier.

None of this would have been possible without the development of duplex technology to
replace the relatively primitive simplex technology of the first phase of mobile
communication. In duplex technology, there are two frequencies available simultaneously.
These two frequencies can be obtained by the principle of Frequency Division Duplex
(FDD). To send two signals wirelessly, it is necessary to create a paired spectrum, where
one band carries the uplink (from phone to antenna) and the other carries the downlink
(from antenna to phone).Time Division Duplex (TDD) can achieve the same thing, but
instead of splitting the frequency, the uplink and downlink are switched very rapidly, giving
the impression that one frequency is used.

For mobile telephony to work to its fullest potential, it needs to have a network through
which it can relay signals.This network depends on base stations which send and receive
the signals. The base stations tend to be simple constructions, or masts, on top of which
are mounted the antennas. With the rapid increase in demand for mobile services, the
infrastructure of antennas in the United Kingdom is now huge.

Many thousands of reports have appeared claiming that the signals relayed by these
antennas are harmful to human and animal health. The claims focus on the fact that the
antennas are transmitting radio waves in microwave form. In some ways, public demand is
responsible for the increase in the alleged threat to health. Until quite recently, voice and
text messages were transmitted using 2G technology. A 2G mast can send a low-
frequency microwave signal approximately 35 kilometres.Third generation (3G) technology
allows users to wirelessly download information from the internet and is extremely popular.
The difference is that 3G technology uses a higher frequency to carry the signals, allowing
masts to emit more radiation. This problem Is intensified by the need to have masts in
closer proximity to each other and to the handsets themselves. Whatever danger there was
in 2G signals is greatly multiplied by the fact that the 3G masts are physically much closer
to people.
Government authorities have so far refused to accept that there is a danger to public
health, and tests carried out by governments and telecommunications companies have
been restricted to testing to see if heat is being produced from these microwaves.
According to many, however, the problem is not heat, but electromagnetic waves which are
found near the masts.

It is believed that some people, though not all, have a condition known as electro-
sensitivity or electro-hypersensitivity (EHS), meaning that the electromagnetism makes
them ill in some way.The actual health threat from these pulsed microwave signals is an
area which greatly needs more research. It has been claimed that the signals affect all
living organisms, including plants, at a cellular level and cause symptoms in people ranging
from tiredness and headaches to cancer. Of particular concern is the effect that increased
electromagnetic fields may have on children and the fear is that the negative effects on
their health may not manifest themselves until they have had many years of continued
exposure to high levels. Tests carried out on animals living close to this form of radiation
are particulady useful because scientists can rule out the psychological effect that humans
might be exhibiting due to their fear of possible contamination.

Of course, the danger of exposure exists when using a mobile phone but since we do this
for limited periods, between which it is believed our bodies can recover, it is not considered
as serious as the effect of living or working near a mast (sometimes mounted on the very
building we occupy) which is transmitting electromagnetic waves 24 hours a day.

Questions 1 -6

Answer the questions below.

Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.

1..................... What were early two-way radios unable to use?

2..................... What did you have to do in order to talk on a radio using simplex tech?

3..................... Where were early mobile phones generally used?
4..................... What development introduced digital technology into mobile telephony?

5..................... Apart from the area of electronics, in which area did developments help
make phones more mobile?

6..................... What type of text message was the first one ever sent?


Questions 7-10

Complete the diagram.
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.

Frequency Division Duplex (F) two signals sent 7.....................

Two bands together, known as a 8.....................


9.....................

10.....................


Questions 11-13

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

11 3G technology is believed to be more of a threat to health because

A the signals are transmitted over much greater distances than before.

B the masts are closer together and emit higher frequencies.
C the signals are carrying both voice and text messages.

D the modern handsets needed emit more radiation.

12 Why might the testing of animals give us more reliable results?

A because most of them live closer to the masts

B because they are continually exposed to higher levels of radiation
C because they are not affected at a cellular level

D because they are not afraid of the effects of radiation

13 What is believed to limit the danger from mobile phones?

A not using them continuously

B turning them off when not in use
C mounting a mast on the building where you live or work

D keeping healthy and getting enough sleep

Solution:

1. (existing) phone 8. paired
networks spectrum
2. press a button 9. uplink

3. (in) cars 10. downlink
4. 2G / the second
11. B
generation
5. battery design 12. D

6. machine-generated 13. A
7. wirelessly
