TITLE: How to find your way out of a food desert
INDEX: 206
============================================================

How to find your way out of a food desert

Ordinary citizens have been using the internet to draw attention to the lack of healthy
eating options in inner cities

Over the last few months, a survey has been carried out of over 200 greengrocers and
convenience stores in Crown Heights, a neighborhood in Brooklyn, New York. As
researchers from the Brooklyn Food Association enter the details, colorful dots appear on
their online map, which display the specific location of each of the food stores in a handful
of central Brooklyn neighborhoods. Clicking on a dot will show you the store's name and
whether it carries fresh fruit and vegetables, wholegrain bread, low-fat dairy and other
healthy options.
The researchers plan eventually to survey the entire borough of Brooklyn. ‘We want to get
to a more specific and detailed description of what that looks like’, says Jeffrey Heehs, who
leads the project. He hopes it will help residents find fresh food in urban areas where the
stores sell mostly packaged snacks or fast food, areas otherwise known as food deserts.
The aim of the project is also to assist government officials in assessing food availability,
and in forming future policies about what kind of food should be sold and where.

In fact, the Brooklyn project represents the intersection of two growing trends: mapping
fresh food markets in US cities, and private citizens creating online maps of local
neighborhood features. According to Michael Goodchild, a geographer at the University of
California at Santa Barbara, citizen map makers may make maps because there is no good
government map, or to record problems such as burned-out traffic lights.

According to recent studies, people at higher risk of chronic disease and who receive
minimal incomes for the work they do, frequently live in neighborhoods located in food
deserts. But how did these food deserts arise? Linda Alwitt and Thomas Donley, marketing
researchers at DePaul University in Chicago, found that supermarkets often can’t afford the
amount of land required for their stores in cities. City planning researcher Cliff Guy and
colleagues at the University of Leeds in the UK found in 2004 that smaller urban groceries
tend to close due to competition from suburban supermarkets.

As fresh food stores leave a neighborhood, residents find it harder to eat well and stay
healthy. Food deserts are linked with lower local health outcomes, and they may be a
driving force in the health disparities between lower-income and affluent people in the US.
Until recently, the issue attracted little national attention, and received no ongoing funding
for research.

Now, more US cities are becoming aware of their food landscapes. Last year, the United
States Department of Agriculture launched a map of where food stores are located in all
the US counties. Mari Gallagher, who runs a private consulting firm, says her researchers
have mapped food stores and related them to health statistics for the cities of Detroit,
Chicago, Cincinnati and Washington, D.c. These maps help cities identify where food
deserts are and, occasionally, have documented that people living in food deserts have
higher rates of diet-related diseases.

The Brooklyn project differs in that it’s run by a local core of five volunteers who have
worked on the project for the past year, rather than trained, academic researchers. To
gather data, they simply go to individual stores with pre-printed surveys in hand, and once
the storekeeper's permission has been obtained, check off boxes on their list against the
products for sole in the store. Their approach to data collection and research has been
made possible by technologies such as mapping software and GPS-related smart phones,
Google Maps and OpenStreeMap, an open-source online map with a history of
involvement in social issues. Like Brooklyn Food Association volunteers, many citizen
online map makers use maps to bring local problems to official attention, Goodchild says.
Heehs, the mapping project leader, says that after his group gathers more data, it will
compare neighborhoods, come up with solutions to address local needs, and then present
them to New York City officials. Their website hasn’t caught them much local or official
attention yet, however. It was launched only recently, but its creators haven’t yet set up
systems to see who’s looking at it.

Experts who visited the Brooklyn group’s site were optimistic but cautious. ‘This kind of
detailed information could be very useful’ says Michele Ver Ploeg, an economist for the
Department of Agriculture. To make the map more helpful to both residents and policy
makers, she would like to see price data for healthy products, too. Karen Ansel, a
registered dietician and a spokesperson for the American Dietetic Association, found the
site confusing to navigate. ‘That said, with this information in place the group has the tools
to build a more user-friendly site that could be ... very helpful to consumers’, she says. ‘The
group also should ensure their map is available to those who don’t have internet access at
home’, she adds. In fact, a significant proportion of Brooklyn residents don’t have internet
access at home and 8 percent rely on dial-up service, instead of high-speed internet
access, according to Gretchen Maneval, director of Brooklyn College’s Center for the study
of Brooklyn. ‘It’s still very much a work in progress’, Heehs says of the online map. They’ll
start advertising it online and by email to other community groups, such as urban food
garden associations, next month. He also hopes warmer days in the spring will draw out
fresh volunteers to spread awareness and to finish surveying, as they have about two-
thirds of Brooklyn left to cover.

Questions 1-6

Complete the notes below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.

Data on food deserts and their effects on health

The Brooklyn Food Association

- The online map provides users with a store’s name, 1..................... and details of its
produce
- One goal of the mapping project is to help develop new 2..................... on food.
- Citizen maps are sometimes made when 3..................... maps are unsatisfactory.

Reasons for the development of food deserts

-New research suggests that people living in food deserts often have low 4.....................
-Some supermarkets are unable to buy enough 5..................... inside cities for their
stores
-Small grocery stores in cities often cannot cope with supermarket 6.....................


Questions 7-13

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage ?
In boxes 7-13 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this


7..................... A group of professional researchers are in charge of the Brooklyn project.

8..................... The Brooklyn project team carries out their assessment of stores without
the owner’s knowledge

9..................... The Brooklyn project has experienced technical difficulties setting up the
website

10..................... The city government has taken a considerable interest in the Brooklyn
project website

11..................... Michele Ver Ploeg believes the Brooklyn project website should contain
additional information

12..................... The rate of internet use in Brooklyn is unlikely to increase in the near
future
13..................... Jeffrey Heehs would like more people to assist with the Brooklyn project
research

Solution:

1. location 8. TRUE
2. policies 9. NOT GIVEN

3. government 10. FALSE
4. incomes 11. TRUE

5. land 12. NOT GIVEN
6. suburban 13. TRUE

7. FALSE
