TITLE: How war debris could cause cancer
INDEX: 211
============================================================

How war debris could cause cancer

A Could the mystery over how depleted uranium might cause genetic damage be closer to
being solved? It may be, if a controversial claim by two researchers is right. They say that
minute quantities of the material lodged in the body may kick out energetic electrons that
mimic the effect of beta radiation. This, they argue, could explain how residues of depleted
uranium scattered across former war zones could be increasing the risk of cancers and
other problems among soldiers and local people.

B Depleted uranium is highly valued by the military, who use it in the tips of armourpiercing
weapons. The material’s high density and self-sharpening properties help it to penetrate
the armour of enemy tanks and bunkers. Its use in conflicts has risen sharply in recent
years. The UN Environment Programme (UNEP) estimates that shells containing 1700
tonnes of the material were fired during the 2003 Iraq war. Some researchers and
campaigners are convinced that depleted uranium left in the people exposed to it.
Governments and the military disagree, and point out that there is no conclusive
epidemiological evidence for this. And while they acknowledge that the material is weakly
radioactive, they say this effect is too small to explain the genetic damage at the levels
seen in war veterans and civilians.

C Organisations such as the UK’s Royal Society, the US Department of Veterans Affairs
and UNEP have called for more comprehensive epidemiological studies to clarify the link
between depleted uranium and any ill effects. Meanwhile, various testtube and animal
studies have suggested that depleted uranium may increase the risk of cancer, according
to a review of the scientific literature published in May 2008 by the US National Research
Council. The authors of the NRC report argue that more long-term and quantitative
research is needed on the effects of uranium’s chemical toxicity. They say the science
seems to support the theory that genetic damage might be occurring because uranium’s
chemical toxicity and weak radioactivity could somehow reinforce each other, though no
one knows what the mechanism for this might be.

D Now two researchers, Chris Busby and Ewald Schnug, have a new theory that they say
explains how depleted uranium could cause genetic damage. Their theory invokes a well-
known process called the photoelectric effect. This is the main mechanism by
which gamma photons with energies of about 100 kiloelectronvolts (keV) or less are
blocked by matter: the photon transfers its energy to an electron in the atom’s electron
cloud, which is ejected into the surroundings.
An atom’s ability to stop photons by this mechanism depends on the fourth power of its
atomic number - the number of protons in its nucleus - so heavy elements are far better at
intercepting gamma radiation and X-rays than light elements. This means that uranium
could be especially effective at capturing photons and kicking out damaging
photoelectrons: with an atomic number of 92, uranium blocks low-energy gamma photons
over 450 times as effectively as the lighter element calcium, for instance.

E Busby and Schnug say that previous risk models have ignored this well-established
physical effect. They claim that depleted uranium could be kicking out photoelectrons in the
body’s most vulnerable spots. Various studies have shown that dissolved uranium -
ingested in food or water, for example - is liable to attach to DNA strands within cells,
because uranium binds strongly to DNA phosphate. “Photoelectrons from uranium are
therefore likely to be emitted precisely where they will cause most damage to genetic
material,” says Busby.

Busby and Schnug base their claim on calculations of the photoelectrons that would be
produced by the interation between normal background levels of gamma radiation and
uranium in the body. “Our detailed calculations indicate that the phantom photoelectrons
are the predominant effect by far for uranium genome toxicity, and that uranium could be
1500 times as powerful as an emitter of photoelectrons than as an alpha emitter.” Their
computer modelling results are described in a peer-reviewed paper to be published in this
month by the IPNSS in a book called Loads and Fate of Fertiliser Derived Uranium.


G Hans-Georg Menzel, who chairs the International Commission on Radiological
Protection’s committee on radiation doses, acknowledges that the theory should be
considered, but he doubts that it will prove significant. He suspects that under normal
background radiation the effect is too weak to inflict many of the “double hits” of energy that
are known to be most damaging to cells. “It is very unlikely that individual cells would be
subject to two or more closely spaced photoelectron impacts under normal background
gamma irradiation,” he says. Despite his doubts, Menzel raised the issue last week with his
committee in St Petersburg, Russia, and says that several colleagues “intended to collect
relevant data and perform calculations to check whether there was any possibility of a real
effect in living tissues”. Organisations in the UK, including the Ministry of Defence and the
Health Protection Agency, say they have no plans to investigate Busby’s hypothesis.

H Radiation biophysicist Mark Hill of the University of Oxford would like to see a fuller
investigation, though he suggests this might show that the photoelectric effect is not as
powerful as Busby claims. “We really need more detailed calculations and dose estimates
for realistic situations with and without uranium present,” he says. Hill’s doubts centre on an
effect called Compton scattering, which he believes needs to be factored into any
calculations. With Compton scattering, uranium is only 4.5 times as effective as calcium at
stopping gamma photons, so Hill says that taking it into account would reduce the relative
importance of uranium as an emitter of secondary electrons. If he is right, this would dilute
the mechanism proposed by Busby and Schnug.

I The arguments over depleted uranium are likely to continue, whatever the outcome of
these experiments. Whether Busby’s theory holds up or not remains to be seen, but
investigating it can only help to clear up some of the doubts about this mysterious
substance.

Questions 1-5

The reading Passage has nine paragraphs A-I.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter A-I, in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet. NB you may use any letter
more than once

1..................... a famous process is given relating to the new theory.

2..................... a person who acknowledges but suspects the theory.

3..................... the explanation of damage to DNA.
4..................... a debatable and short explanation of the way creating the problems of
soldiers.
5..................... Busby’s hypothesis is not in the investigation plans of organizations.


Questions 6-9

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?
In boxes 6-9 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement is true

FALSE if the statement is false

NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage

6..................... All people believe that depleted uranium is harmful to people’s health.

7..................... Heavier elements can perform better at preventing X-rays and gamma
radiation.

8..................... By particular calculations, it is known that the main effect of uranium
genome toxicity is phantom photoelectrons.

9..................... Most scientists support Mark Hill’s opinion.


Questions 10-13

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage using no more
than two words from the Reading Passage for each answer. Write your answers in boxes
23-26 on your answer sheet.

10..................... attaches importance to depleted uranium due to its 11.....................
and 12..................... features, which are helpful in the war. However, it has ill effects in
people, and then causes organisations’ appeal to do more relative studies. According to
some scientists, we should do research about the impact of uranium’s 13.....................
which may be enhanced with weak radioactivity.
4

Solution:

1. D 8. TRUE
2. G 9. NOT GIVEN

3. E 10. the military
4. A 11. high density

5. G 12. self-sharpening
6. FALSE 13. chemical toxicity

7. TRUE
