TITLE: Hunting Perfume in Madagascar
INDEX: 214
============================================================

Hunting Perfume in Madagascar

A. Ever since the unguentari plied their trade in ancient Rome, perfumers have to keep
abreast of changing fashions. These days they have several thousand ingredients to
choose from when creating new scents, but there is always demand for new combinations.
The bigger the “palette7 of smells, the better the perfumer’s chance of creating something
fresh and appealing. Even with everyday products such as shampoo and soap, kitchen
cleaners and washing powders, consumers are becoming increasingly fussy. And many of
today’s fragrances have to survive tougher treatment than ever before, resisting the
destructive power of bleach or a high temperature wash cycle. Chemists can create new
smells from synthetic molecules, and a growing number of the odours on the perfumer’s
palette are artificial. But nature has been in the business far longer.

B. The island of Madagascar is an evolutionary hot spot; 85% of its plants are unique,
making it an ideal source for novel fragrances. Last October, Quest International, a
company that develops fragrances for everything from the most delicate perfumes to
cleaning products, sent an expedition to Madagascar in pursuit of some of nature’s most
novel fragrances. With some simple technology, borrowed from the pollution monitoring
industry, and a fair amount of ingenuity, the perfume hunters bagged 20 promising new
aromas in the Madagascan rainforest. Each day the team set out from their “hotel”—a
wooden hut lit by kerosene lamps, and trailed up and down paths and animal tracks,
exploring the thick vegetation up to 10 meters on either side of the trail. Some smells came
from obvious places, often big showy flowers within easy reach- Others were harder to pin
down. “Often it was the very small flowers that were much more interesting, says Clery.
After the luxuriance of the rainforest, the little-known island of Nosy Hara was a stark, dry
place geologically and biologically very different from the mainland, “Apart from two
beaches, the rest of the Island Is impenetrable, except by hacking through the bush, says
Clery. One of the biggest prizes here was a sweet- smelling sap weeping from the gnarled
branches of some ancient shrubby trees in the parched Interior. So far no one has been
able to identify the plant.


C. With most flowers or fruits, the hunters used a technique originally designed to trap and
identify air pollutants. The technique itself is relatively simple. A glass bell jar or flask S
fitted over the flower. The fragrance molecules are trapped in this “headspace” and can be
extracted by pumping the air out over a series of filters which absorb different types of
volatile molecules. Back home in the laboratory, the molecules are flushed out of the filters
and injected into a gas chromatograph for analysis. If it Is Impossible to attach the
headspace gear, hunters fix an absorbent probe close to the source of the smell. The
probe looks something like a hypodermic syringe, except that the ‘needle’ is made of
silicone rubber which soaks up molecules from the air. After a few hours, the hunters
retract the rubber needle and seal the tube, keeping the odour molecules inside until they
can.be injected into the gas chromatograph in the laboratory.

D. Some of the most promising fragrances were those given, off by resins that oozed from
the bark of trees. Resins are the source of many traditional perfumes, including
frankincense and myrrh. The most exciting resin came from a Calophyllum tree, which
produces a strongly scented medicinal oil. The sap of this Calophyllum smelt rich and
aromatic, a little like church incense. But It also smelt of something the fragrance industry
has learnt to live without castoreum a substance extracted from the musk glands of
beavers and once a key ingredient in many perfumes. The company does not use animal
products any longer, but Ã was wonderful to find a tree with an animal smell.

E. The group also set out from the island to capture the smell of coral reefs. Odors that
conjure up sun kissed seas are highly sought after by the perfume industry. “From the
ocean, the only thing we have is seaweed, and that has a dark and heavy aroma. We hope
to find something unique among the corals,” says Dir. The challenge for the hunters was to
extract a smell from water rather than air. This was an opportunity to try Clery’s new
“aquaspace” apparatus a set of filters that work underwater. On Nosy Hara, jars were fixed
over knobs of coral about 2 meters down and water pumped out over the absorbent filters.
So what does coral smell like? “It’s a bit like lobster and crab,” says Clery. The team’s task
now is to recreate the best of then captured smells. First they must identify the molecules
that make up each fragrance. Some ingredients may be quite common chemicals. But
some may be completely novel, or they may be too complex or expensive to make in the
lab. The challenge then is to conjure up the fragrances with more readily available
materials. “We can avoid the need to import plants from the rainforest by creating the smell
with a different set of chemicals from those in the original material,” says Clery. “If we get it
right, you can sniff the sample and it will transport you straight back to the moment you
smelt it in the rainforest.”

Questions 1-5

The reading passage has seven paragraphs A-E

Which paragraphs contains the following details Write the correct number, A-E, in boxes 1-
5 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.

1..................... One currently preferred spot to pick up plants for novel finding

2..................... A new task seems to be promising yet producing limited finding in
fragrance source

3..................... The demanding conditions for fragrance to endure

4..................... A substitute for substance no longer available to the perfume
manufacture

5..................... Description of an outdoor expedition on land chasing new fragrances


Questions 6-10

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage ? In
boxes 6-10 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement is true

FALSE if the statement is false
NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage 2

6..................... Manufacturers can choose to use synthetic odors for the perfume
nowadays

7..................... Madagascar is chosen to be a place for hunting plants which are rare
in other parts of the world

8..................... Capturing the smell is one of the most important things for creating
new aromas

9..................... The technique the hunters used to trap fragrance molecules is totally
out of their ; ingenuity

10..................... Most customers prefer the perfume made of substance extracted
from the musk I glands of animals


Questions 11-13
Filling the blanks and answer the questions below with only one word.


11.....................

12.....................
13.....................

Solution:

1. B 8. NOT GIVEN
2. E 9. FALSE

3. A 10. NOT GIVEN
4. D 11. headspace

5. B 12. filters
6. TRUE 13. needle

7. TRUE
