TITLE: IMPLEMENTING THE CYCLE OF SUCCESS: A CASE
INDEX: 215
============================================================

IMPLEMENTING THE CYCLE OF SUCCESS: A CASE

STUDY

Within Australia, Australian Hotels Inc (AHI) operates nine hotels and employs over 2000
permanent full-time staff, 300 permanent part-time employees and 100 casual staff. One of
its latest ventures, the Sydney Airport hotel (SAH), opened in March 1995. The hotel is the
closest to Sydney Airport and is designed to provide the best available accommodation,
food and beverage and meeting facilities in Sydney's southern suburbs. Similar to many
international hotel chains, however, AHI has experienced difficulties in Australia in
providing long-term profits for hotel owners, as a result of the country's high labour-cost
structure. In order to develop an economically viable hotel organisation model, AHI decided
to implement some new policies and practices at SAH.

The first of the initiatives was an organisational structure with only three levels of
management - compared to the traditional seven. Partly as a result of this change, there
are 25 per cent fewer management positions, enabling a significant saving. This change
also has other implications. Communication, both up and down the organisation, has
greatly improved. Decision-making has been forced down in many cases to front-line
employees. As a result, guest requests are usually met without reference to a supervisor,
improving both customer and employee satisfaction.

The hotel also recognised that it would need a different approach to selecting employees
who would fit in with its new policies. In its advertisements, the hotel stated a preference for
people with some 'service' experience in order to minimise traditional work practices being
introduced into the hotel. Over 7000 applicants filled in application forms for the 120 jobs
initially offered at SAH. The balance of the positions at the hotel (30 management and 40
shift leader positions) were predominantly filled by transfers from other AHI properties.

A series of tests and interviews were conducted with potential employees, which eventually
left 280 applicants competing for the 120 advertised positions. After the final interview,
potential recruits were divided into three categories. Category A was for applicants
exhibiting strong leadership qualities, Category C was for applicants perceived to be
followers, and Category B was for applicants with both leader and follower qualities.
Department heads and shift leaders then composed prospective teams using a
combination of people from all three categories. Once suitable teams were formed, offers
of employment were made to team members.

Another major initiative by SAH was to adopt a totally multi-skilled workforce. Although
there may be some limitations with highly technical jobs such as cooking or maintenance,
wherever possible, employees at SAH are able to work in a wide variety of positions. A
multi-skilled workforce provides far greater management flexibility during peak and quiet
times to transfer employees to needed positions. For example, when office staff are away
on holidays during quiet periods of the year, employees in either food or beverage or
housekeeping departments can temporarily.
The most crucial way, however, of improving the labour cost structure at SAH was to find
better, more productive ways of providing customer service. SAH management concluded
this would first require a process of 'benchmarking'. The prime objective of the
benchmarking process was to compare a range of service delivery processes across a
range of criteria using teams made up of employees from different departments within the
hotel which interacted with each other. This process resulted in performance measures that
greatly enhanced SAH's ability to improve productivity and quality.

The front office team discovered through this project that a high proportion of AHI Club
member reservations were incomplete. As a result, the service provided to these guests
was below the standard promised to them as part of their membership agreement.
Reducing the number of incomplete reservations greatly improved guest perceptions of
service.
In addition, a program modelled on an earlier project called 'Take Charge' was
implemented. Essentially, Take Charge provides an effective feedback loop horn both
customers and employees. Customer comments, both positive and negative, are recorded
by staff. These are collated regularly to identify opportunities for improvement. Just as
importantly, employees are requested to note down their own suggestions for
improvement. (AHI has set an expectation that employees will submit at least three
suggestions for every one they receive from a customer.)

Employee feedback is reviewed daily and suggestions are implemented within 48 hours, if
possible, or a valid reason is given for non-implementation. If suggestions require analysis
or data collection, the Take Charge team has 30 days in which to address the issue and
come up with recommendations.

Although quantitative evidence of AHI's initiatives at SAH are limited at present, anecdotal
evidence clearly suggests that these practices are working. Indeed AHI is progressively
rolling out these initiatives in other hotels in Australia, whilst numerous overseas visitors
have come to see how the program works.


This article has been adapted and condensed fem the article by R Carter (19%),

'Implementing the cycle of success: A case study of the Sheraten Pacific Division', Asia
Pacific Journal of Human Resources, 34(3): 111-23. Names and other details have been
changed and report findings may have been given a different emphasis from the original. W
eare grateful to Asia Pacific Journal of Human Resources for allowing us to use, file
material in this way.

Questions 1-5

Choose the appropriate letters A-D and write them in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.

1 The high costs of running AHI's hotels are related to their ...

A management.

B size.

C staff.
D policies.


2 SAH's new organisational structure requires ...

A 75% of the old management positions.

B 25% of the old management positions.

C 25% more management positions.

D 5% fewer management positions.


3 The SAH's approach to organisational structure required changing practices in ..

A industrial relations.

B firing staff.

C hiring staff.

D marketing.


4 The total number of jobs advertised at the SAH was ...

A 70.
B 120.

C 170.

D 280.


5 Categories A, B and C were used to select...

A front office staff.

B new teams.
C department heads.

D new managers.


Questions 6-13

Complete the following summary of the last four paragraphs of Reading Passage 1 using
ONE OR TWO words from the Reading Passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 6-13 on your answer sheet.


WHAT THEY DID AT SAH

Teams of employees were selected from different hotel departments to participate in a
6..................... exercise.

The information collected was used to compare 7..................... processes which, in turn,
led to the development of 8..................... that would be used to increase the hotel's
capacity to improve 9..................... as well as quality.
Also, an older program known as '10.....................' was introduced at SAH. In this
program, 11..................... is sought from customers and staff. Wherever possible
12..................... suggestions are implemented within 48 hours. Other suggestions are
investigated for their feasibility for a period of up to 13.....................

Solution:

8. (performance)
1. C
measures
2. A 9. productivity
10. (') Take Charge
3. C
(')
4. B 11. feedback
12. employee(s') //
5. B
staff
6. benchmarking 13. 30 days
7. service delivery
