TITLE: Insect decision-making
INDEX: 220
============================================================

Insect decision-making

It has long been held that decision made collectively by large groups of people are more
likely to turn out to be accurate than decisions made by individuals. The idea goes back to
the 'jury theorem’ of Nicolas de Condorcet, an 18th-century French philosopher who was
one of the first to apply mathematics to the social sciences. Condorcet’s theory describes
collective decisions, outlining how democratic decisions tend to outperform dictatorial ones.
If, for example, each member of a jury has only partial information ,the majority decision is
more likely to be correct than a decision arrived at by a single juror. Moreover, the
probability of a correct decision increases with the size of the jury.

Now it is becoming clear that group decisions are also extremely valuable for the success
of social animals, such as ants ,bees .birds and dolphins .Bees make collective decisions
,and they do it rather well, according to Christian List of the London School of Economics
,who has studied group decision-making in humans and animals. Researchers led by Dr
List looked at colonies once the original colony reaches a certain size. The queen goes off
with about two-thirds of the worker bees to live in a new home or nest, leaving a daughter
queen in the old nest with the remaining workers. Among the bees that depart are some
that have searched for and found some new nest sites, and reported back using a
characteristic body movement known as a 'waggle dance' to indicate to the other bees the
suitable places they have located. The longer the dance, the better the site. After a while,
other bees start to visit the sites signaled by their companions to see for themselves and,
on their return, also perform more waggle dances. The process eventually leads to a
consensus on the best site and the breakaway swarm migrates. The decision is remarkably
reliable ,with the bees choosing the best site even when there are only small difference
between alternative sites.

But exactly how do bees reach such a robust consensus? To find out ,Dr List and his
colleagues used a computer generated model of the decision-making process. By
experimenting with it they found that, when bees in the model were very good at finding
nesting sites but did not share their information, this dramatically slowed down the
migration .leaving the swarm homelss and vulnerable .Conversely .bees in the model
blindly following the waggle dances of others without first checking. The researchers
concluded that the ability of bees to identify successfully and quickly the best site depends
on both the bees ‘interdependence in communicating the whereabouts of the bees site, and
their independence in confirming this information for themselves.

Another situation in which collective decisions are taken occurs when animals are either
isolated from crucial sources of information or dominated by other members of the group.
José Halloy of the Free University of Brussels in Belgium used robotic cockroaches to
subvert the behaviour of living cockroaches and control their decision-making process. In
his experiment, the artificial bugs were introduced to the live ones and soon became
sufficiently socially integrated that they were perceived by the real cockroaches as equals.
By manipulating the robots, which were in the minority, Halloy was able to persuade the
living cockroaches to choose an inappropriate shelter-even one which they had rejected
before being infiltrated by the robots.
The way insects put into effect collective decisions can be complex and as important as the
decisions themselves .At the University of Bristol, in the UK, Nigel Franks and his
colleagues studied how a species of ant establishes a new nest. Franks and his associates
reported how the insects reduce the problems associated with making a necessarily swift
choice. If the ants’ existing nest become suddenly threatened, the insects choose certain
ants to act as scouts to find a new nest.

How quickly they accomplish the transfer to a new home depends not only on how soon
the best available site is found, but also on how quickly the migration there can be
achieved.

Once the suitable new nest is identified , the chosen ants begin to lead others , which have
made it to the new site or which may simply be in the vicinity, back to the original
threatened nest. In this way, those ants which are familiar with the route can help transport
,for example ,the queen and young ants to the new site, and simultaneously show the way
to those ants which have been left behind to guard the old nest. In this way moving
processes are accomplished faster and more efficiently. Thus the dynamics of collective
decision-making are closely related to the efficient implementation of those decisions .How
this might apply to choices that humans make is , as yet,unclear. But it does suggest, even
for humans ,the importance of recruiting dynamic leaders to a cause,because the most
important thing about collective decision-making ,as shown by these insect experiments, is
to get others to follow.

Questions 1-6

Reading Passage has six paragraphs,A-F

Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-vii, in boxes -16 on your answer sheet.

List of Headings
i The effect of man-made imitations on insects
ii The need to instruct additional insect guides
iii Signals used by certain insects to indicate a discovery
iv How urgency can affect the process of finding a new home
v The use of trained insects in testing scientific theories
vi The use of virtual scenarios in the study of insect behaviour
vii How the number of decision-makers affects the decision

1..................... Paragraph A

2..................... Paragraph B
3..................... Paragraph C

4..................... Paragraph D

5..................... Paragraph E

6..................... Paragraph F


Questions 7-10

Look at the following findings (Questions 7-10) and the list of academics below.

Match each finding with the correct academic, A-D

Write the correct letter, A-D, in boxes 7-10 on your answer sheet.

NB you may use any letter more than once.

7..................... Certain members can influence the rest of the group to alter a
previous decision.

8..................... Individual verification of a proposed choice is important for
successful decision outcome.

9..................... The more individuals taking part in a decision, the better the
decision will be.

10..................... The decision-making process of certain insects produces
excellent results even when fine distinctions are required.

List of Academics
ANicolas de Condorcet

BChristian List and colleagues
CJosé Halloy

DNigel Franks and colleagues


Questions 11-13

Complete the summary below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet.

A study of insect decision-making

A Bristol University study looked at how insects make decisions when their home has been
11...................... The ants in the experiment relied on the use of individuals called
12..................... new nest and efficiently direct the others to go there. The study concluded
that the effective implementation of the ants' decision meant that the insects could change
homes quickly. The study emphasized the necessity, for people well as insects,of having
active 13..................... in order to execute decisions successfully.

Solution:

1. vii 8. B
2. iii 9. A

3. vi 10. B
4. i 11. threatened

5. iv 12. scouts
6. ii 13. leaders

7. C
