TITLE: Inspired by Mimicking Mother Nature
INDEX: 223
============================================================

Inspired by Mimicking Mother Nature

{A} Researchers and designers around the globe endeavor to create new technologies
that, by honoring the tenets of life, are both highly efficient and often environmentally
friendly. And while biomimicry is not a new concept (Leonardo da Vinci looked to nature to
design his flying machines, for example, and pharmaceutical companies have long been
miming plant organisms in synthetic drugs), there is a greater need for products and
manufacturing processes that use a minimum of energy, materials, and toxins. What’s
more, due to technological advancements and a newfound spirit of innovation among
designers, there are now myriad ways to mimic Mother Nature’s best assets.

{B} “We have a perfect storm happening right now,” says Jay Harman, an inventor and
CEO of PAX Scientific, which designs fans, mixers, and pumps to achieve maximum
efficiency by imitating the natural flow of fluids. “Shapes in nature are extremely simple
once you understand them, but to understand what geometries are at play, and to adapt
them, is a very complex process. We only just recently have had the computer power and
manufacturing capability to produce these types of shapes.” “If we could capture nature’s
efficiencies across the board, we could decrease dependency on fuel by at least 50
percent,” Harman says. “What we’re finding already with the tools and methodology we
have right now is that we can reduce energy consumption by between 30 and 40 percent.”

{C} It’s only recently that mainstream companies have begun to equate biomimicry with the
bottom line. DaimlerChrysler, for example, introduced a prototype car modeled on a coral
reef fish. Despite its boxy, cube-shaped body, which defies a long-held aerodynamic
standard in automotive design (the raindrop shape), the streamlined boxfish proved to be
aerodynamically ideal and the unique construction of its skin—numerous hexagonal, bony
plates—a perfect recipe for designing a car of maximum strength with minimal weight.

{D} Companies and communities are flocking to Janine Benyus, author of the landmark
book Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature (Perennial, 2002) and cofounder of the
Biomimicry Guild, which seats biologists at the table with researchers and designers at
companies such as Nike, Interface carpets, Novell, and Procter & Gamble. Their objective
is to marry industrial problems with natural solutions.

{E} Benyus, who hopes companies will ultimately transcend mere product design to
embrace nature on a more holistic level, breaks biomimicry into three tiers. On a basic
(albeit complicated) level, industry will mimic nature’s precise and efficient shapes,
structures, and geometries. The microstructure of the lotus leaf, for example, causes
raindrops to bead and run off immediately, while self-cleaning and drying its surface—a
discovery that the British paint company Sto has exploited in a line of building paints. The
layered structure of a butterfly wing or a peacock plume, which creates iridescent color by
refracting light, is being mimicked by cosmetics giant L’Oreal in a soon-to-be-released line
of eye shadow, lipstick, and nail varnish.

{F} The next level of biomimicry involves imitating natural processes and biochemical
“recipes”: Engineers and scientists are now looking at the nasal glands of seabirds to solve
the problem of desalination; the abalone’s ability to self-assemble its incredibly durable
shell in water, using local ingredients, has inspired an alternative to the conventional, and
often toxic, “heat, beat, and treat” manufacturing method. How other organisms deal with
harmful bacteria can also be instructive: Researchers for the Australian company Biosignal,
for instance, observed a seaweed that lives in an environment teeming with microbes to
figure out how it kept free of the same sorts of bacterial colonies, called biofilms, that cause
plaque on your teeth and clog up your bathroom drain. They determined that the seaweed
uses natural chemicals, called furanones, that jam the cell-to-cell signaling systems that
allow bacteria to communicate and gather.

{G} Ultimately, the most sophisticated application of biomimicry, according to Benyus, is
when a company starts seeing itself as an organism in an economic ecosystem that must
make thrifty use of limited resources and creates symbiotic relationships with other
organisms. A boardroom approach at this level begins with imagining any given company,
or collection of industries, as a forest, prairie, or coral reef, with its own “food
web”(manufacturing inputs and outputs) and asking whether waste products from one
manufacturing process can be used, or perhaps sold, as an ingredient for another industrial
activity. For instance, Geoffrey Coates, a chemist at Cornell, has developed a
biodegradable plastic synthesized from carbon dioxide and limonene (a major component
in the oil extracted from citrus rind) and is working with a cement factory to trap their waste
CO2 and use it as an ingredient.

{H} Zero Emissions Research and Initiatives (ZERI), a global network of scientists,
entrepreneurs, and educators, has initiated eco industrial projects that attempt to find ways
to reuse all wastes as raw materials for other processes. Storm Brewing in Newfoundland,

Canada—in one of a growing number of projects around the world applying ZERI
principles—is using spent grains, a by-product of the beer-making process, to make bread
and grow mushrooms.

As industries continue to adopt nature’s models, entire manufacturing processes could
operate locally, with local ingredients like the factories that use liquefied beach sand to
make windshields. As more scientists and engineers begin to embrace biomimicry, natural
organisms will come to be regarded as mentors, their processes deemed masterful.

Questions 1-6

Look at the following descriptions mentioned in the Reading Passage. Match the three
kinds of levels (A-C) listed below the descriptions. Write the appropriate letters, A-C, in
boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.

(A) First level: mimic nature’s precise and efficient shapes, structures, and geometries

(B) Second level: imitating natural processes and biochemical ‘recipes’

(C) Third level: creates symbiotic relationships with other like organisms

1..................... Synthesized Plastic, developed together with cement factory, can recycle
waste gas.

2..................... Cosmetics companies produce a series of shine cosmetics colours

3..................... People are inspired how to remove excess salt inspired by nature.

4..................... Daimler Chrysler introduced a fish-shaped car.
5..................... Marine plan company integrated itself into a part in economic ecosystem

6..................... natural chemicals developed based on seaweed known to kill bacteria


Questions 7-14

Do the following statements agree with the information given in the Reading Passage? In
boxes 7-14 on your answer sheet, write
YES if the statement agrees with the writer
NO if the statement does not agree with the writer
NOT GIVENif there is no information about this in the passage
7..................... Biomimicry is a totally new concept that has been unveiled recently.

8..................... Leonardo da Vinci has been the first designer to mimic nature

9..................... Scientists believe it involves more than mimicking the shape to capture the
design in nature

10..................... We can save the utilisation of energy by up to 40% if we take advantage of
the current findings.

11..................... Daimler Chrysler’s prototype car modelled on a coral reef fish is a best-
seller.

12..................... Some great companies and communities themselves are seeking solutions
beyond their own industrial scope

13..................... The British paint company Sto did not make the microstructure of the lotus
leaf,applicable

14..................... a Canadian beer Company increased the production the by applying ZERI
principles
4

Solution:

1. C 8. NOT GIVEN
2. A 9. YES

3. B 10. YES
4. A 11. NOT GIVEN

5. C 12. YES
6. B 13. NO

7. NO 14. NO
