TITLE: Intelligence and Giftedness
INDEX: 224
============================================================

Intelligence and Giftedness

A

In 1904 the French minister of education, facing limited resources for schooling, sought a
way to separate the unable from the merely lazy. Alfred Binet got the job of devising
selection principles and his brilliant solution put a stamp on the study of intelligence and
was the forerunner of intelligence tests still used today, he developed a thirty-problem test
in 1905, which tapped several abilities related to intellect, such as judgment and reasoning,
the test determined a given child’s mental age’. The test previously established a norm for
children of a given physical age. (for example, five-year-old on average get ten items
correct), therefore, a child with a mental age of five should score 10, which would mean
that he or she was functioning pretty much as others of that age. The child’s mental age
was then compared to his physical age.

B

A large disparity in the wrong direction (e.g., a child of nine with a mental age of four) might
suggest inability rather than laziness and mean he or she was earmarked for special
schooling, Binet, however, denied that the test was measuring intelligence, its purpose was
simply diagnostic, for selection only. This message was however lost and caused many
problems and misunderstanding later.

C

Although Binet’s test was popular, it was a bit inconvenient to deal with a variety of physical
and mental ages. So in 1912, Wilhelm Stern suggested simplifying this by reducing the two
to a single number, he divided the mental age by the physical age and multiplied the result
by 100. An average child, irrespective of age, would score 100. A number much lower than
100 would suggest the need for help, and one much higher would suggest a child well
ahead of his peer.

D

This measurement is what is now termed the IQ (for intelligence quotient) score and it has
evolved to be used to show how a person, adult or child, performed in relation to others.
(the term IQ was coined by Lewis M. Terman, professor of psychology and education of
Stanford University, in 1916. He had constructed an enormously influential revision of
Binet’s test, called the Stanford-Binet test, versions of which are still given extensively.)

E

The field studying intelligence and developing tests eventually coalesced into a sub-field of
psychology called psychometrics (psycho for ‘mind’ and metrics for ‘measurements’). The
practical side of psychometrics (the development and use of tests) became widespread
quite early, by 1917, when Einstein published his grand theory of relativity, mass-scale
testing was already in use. Germany’s unrestricted submarine warfare (which led to the
sinking of the Lusitania in 1915) provoked the United States to finally enter the First World
War in the same year. The military had to build up an army very quickly; it had two million
inductees to sort out. Who would become officers and who enlisted men?
Psychometricians developed two intelligence tests that help sort all these people out, at
least to some extent, this was the first major use of testing to decide who lived and who
died, as officers were a lot safer on the battlefield, the tests themselves were given under
horrendously bad conditions, and the examiners seemed to lack commonsense, a lot of
recruits simply had no idea what to do and in several sessions most inductees scored zero!
The examiners also came up with the quite astounding conclusion from the testing that the
average American adult’s intelligence was equal to that of a thirteen-year-old!
F

Intelligence testing enforced political and social prejudice, their results were used to argue
that Jews ought to be kept out of the united states because they were so intelligently
inferior that they would pollute the racial mix, and blacks ought not to be allowed to breed
at all. And so abuse and test bias controversies continued to plaque psychometrics.

G
Measurement is fundamental to science and technology, science often advances in leaps
and bounds when measurement devices improve, psychometrics has long tried to develop
ways to gauge psychological qualities such as intelligence and more specific abilities,
anxiety, extroversion, emotional stability, compatibility, with a marriage partner, and so on.
Their scores are often given enormous weight, a single IQ measurement can take on a life
of its own if teachers and parents see it as definitive, it became a major issue in the 70s,
when court cases were launched to stop anyone from making important decisions based
on IQ test scores, the main criticism was and still is that current tests don’t really measure
intelligence, whether intelligence can be measured at all is still controversial, some say it
cannot others say that IQ tests are psychology’s greatest accomplishments.

Questions 14-17

The Reading Passage has seven paragraphs A-G

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter A-G, in boxes 14-17 on your answer sheet.


14..................... IQ is just one single factor of human characteristics.


15..................... Discussion of the methodology behind Professor Stern’s test.

16..................... Inadequacy of IQ test from Binet.

17..................... The definition of IQ was created by a professor.


Questions 18-21

18 Professor Binet devises the test to ……………………

A find those who do not perform satisfied

B choose the best one

C measure the intelligence
D establish the standard of intelligence


19 The test is designed according to ……………………

A math

B age

C reading skill

D gender


20 U.S. Army used Intelligence tests to select………………………

A Officers

B Normal Soldiers

C Examiners

D Submarine drivers.
21 the purpose of the text is to……………………

A Give credit to the contribution of Binet in IQ test

B prove someone’s theory is feasible.

C discuss the validity and limitation of the test
D outline the history of the test


Questions 22-26

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 2?
In boxes 22-26 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement is true

FALSE if the statement is false

NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage


22..................... Part the intension in designing the test by professor Binet has been
misunderstood.

23..................... Age as a factor is completely overlooked in the simplified tests by
Wilhelm Stern

24..................... Einstein was a counter-example of IQ test conclusion.

25..................... IQ test may probably lead to racial discrimination as a negative effect.

26..................... The author regards measuring intelligent test as a goal hardly meaningful.

Solution:

1. G 8. C
2. C 9. TRUE

3. B 10. FALSE
4. D 11. NOT GIVEN

5. B 12. TRUE
6. B 13. NOT GIVEN

7. A
