TITLE: Issues Affecting the Southern Resident Orcas
INDEX: 228
============================================================

Issues Affecting the Southern Resident Orcas

A

Orcas, also known as killer whales, are opportunistic feeders, which means they will take a
variety of different prey species. J, K, and L pods (specific groups of orcas found in the
region) are almost exclusively fish eaters. Some studies show that up to 90 percent of their
diet is salmon, with Chinook salmon being far and away their favorite. During the last 50
years, hundreds of wild runs of salmon have become extinct due to habitat loss and
overfishing of wild stocks. Many of the extinct salmon stocks are the winter runs of chinook
and coho. Although the surviving stocks have probably been sufficient to sustain the
resident pods, many of the runs that have been lost were undoubtedly traditional resources
favored by the resident orcas. This may be affecting the whales’ nutrition in the winter and
may require them to change their patterns of movement in order to search for food.

Other studies with tagged whales have shown that they regularly dive up to 800 feet in this
area.

Researchers tend to think that during these deep dives the whales may be feeding on
bottomfish. Bottomfish species in this area would include halibut, rockfish, lingcod, and
greenling. Scientists estimate that today’s lingcod population in northern Puget Sound and
the Strait of Georgia is only 2 percent of what it was in 1950. The average size of rockfish
in the recreational catch has also declined by several inches since the 1970s, which is
indicative of overfishing. In some locations, certain rockfish species have disappeared
entirely. So even if bottomfish are not a major food resource for the whales, the present low
numbers of available fish increases the pressure on orcas and all marine animals to find
food. (For more information on bottomfish see the San Juan County Bottomfish Recovery
Program.)
B

Toxic substances accumulate in higher concentrations as they move up the food chain.
Because orcas t are the top predator in the ocean and are at the top of several different
food chains in the environment, they tend to be more affected by pollutants than other sea
creatures. Examinations of stranded killer whales have shown some extremely high levels
of lead, mercury, and polychlorinated hydrocarbons. Abandoned marine toxic waste dumps
and present levels of industrial and human refuse pollution of the inland waters probably
presents the most serious threat to the continued existence of this orca population.
Unfortunately, the total remedy to this huge problem would be broad societal changes on
many fronts. But because of the fact that orcas are so popular, they may be the best
species to use as a focal point in bringing about the many changes that need to be made in
order to protect the marine environment as a whole from further toxic poisoning.'

C

The waters around the San Juan Islands are extremely busy due to international
commercial shipping, fishing, whale watching, and pleasure boating. On a busy weekend
day in the summer, it is not uncommon to see numerous boats in the vicinity of the whales
as they travel through the area. The potential impacts from all this vessel traffic with regard
to the whales and other marine animals in the area could be tremendous.
The surfacing and breathing space of marine birds and mammals is a critical aspect of their
habitat, which the animals must consciously deal with on a moment-to-moment basis
throughout their lifetimes. With all the boating activity in the vicinity, there are three ways in
which surface impacts are most likely to affect marine animals: (a) collision, (b) collision
avoidance, and (c) exhaust emissions in breathing pockets.

The first two impacts are very obvious and don’t just apply to vessels with motors.
Kayakers even present a problem here because they’re so quiet. Marine animals, busy
hunting and feeding under the surface of the water, may not be aware that there is a kayak
above them and actually hit the bottom of it as they surface to breathe.

The third impact is one most people don’t even think of. When there are numerous boats in
the area, especially idling boats, there are a lot of exhaust fumes being spewed out on the
surface of the water. When the whale comes up to take a nice big breath of “fresh" air, it
instead gets a nice big breath of exhaust fumes. It’s hard to say how greatly this affects the
animals, but think how breathing polluted air affects us (i.e., smog in large cities like Los
Angeles, breathing the foul air while sitting in traffic jams, etc)._

D

Similar to surface impacts, a primary source of acoustic pollution for this population of
orcas would also be derived from the cumulative underwater noise of vessel traffic. For
cetaceans, the underwater sound environment is perhaps the most critical component of
their sensory and behavioral lives. Orcas communicate with each other over short and long
distances with a variety of clicks, chirps, squeaks, and whistles, along with using
echolocation to locate prey and to navigate. They may also rely on passive listening as a
primary sensory source. The long-term impacts from noise pollution would not likely show
up as noticeable behavioral changes in habitat use, but rather as sensory damage or
gradual reduction in population health. A new study at The Whale Museum called the
SeaSound Remote Sensing Network has begun studying underwater acoustics and its
relationship to orca communication.

Questions 1-4

Reading Passage 3 has four sections (A-D). Choose the most suitable heading for each
section from the list of headings below.

Write the appropriate numbers (i-vii) in boxes 1-4 on your Answer Sheet

There are more headings than sections, so you will not use all of them.
List of Headings
i Top Ocean Predators
1..................... Section A
ii Toxic Exposure
2..................... Section B iii Declining Fish Populations
3..................... Section C iv Pleasure Boating in the San Juan Islands
v Underwater Noise
4..................... Section D
vi Smog in Large Cities vii Impact of Boat Traffic
vi Impact of Boat Traffic


Questions 5-6

For each question, choose the appropriate letter A-D and write it in boxes 5 and 6 on your
Answer Sheet


5 Killer whales (orcas) in the J, K, and L pods prefer to eat

A halibut.

B a type of salmon.

C a variety of animals.
D fish living at the bottom of the sea.

6 Some groups of salmon have become extinct because

A they have lost places to live.

B whales have eaten them.

C they don't get good nutrition.

D the winters in the area are too cold.


Questions 7-14

Complete the chart below.

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 7-14 on your Answer Sheet.

Cause Effect
Scientists believe some whales feed 7..................... These whales dive very deep.

Rockfish caught today is 8..................... than rockfish
Scientists believe that the area is being over fished.
caught in the past.
9..................... affects orcas more than it does other
Orcas are at the top of the ocean food chain.
sea animals.
We can use orcas to make society aware of the
Orcas are a 10..................... species.
problem of marine pollution.
People enjoy boating, fishing, and whale watching in On weekends there are 11..................... near the
the San Juan Islands. whales.
Kayaks are 12..................... Marine animals hit them when they come up for air.

A lot of boats beep their motors running. Whales breathe 13.....................
Boats are noisy. Whales have difficulty 14.....................

Solution:

1. iii 8. less
2. ii 9. pollution

3. vii 10. popular
11. numerous
4. v
boats/vessels
5. B 12. quiet

6. A 13. exhaust fumes
7. (on) 14. communicating (with
bottomfish others)
