TITLE: IT’S ECO-LOGICAL
INDEX: 230
============================================================

IT’S ECO-LOGICAL

Planning an eco-friendly holiday can be a minefield for the well- meaning traveller,
says Steve Watkins. But help is now at hand.

If there were awards for tourism phrases that have been hijacked, diluted and misused then
‘ecotourism’ would earn top prize. The term first surfaced in the early 1980s reflecting a
surge in environmental awareness and a realisation by tour operators that many travellers
wanted to believe their presence abroad would not have a negative impact. It rapidly
became the hottest marketing tag a holiday could carry.

These days the ecotourism label is used to cover anything from a two-week tour living with
remote Indonesian tribes, to a one-hour motorboat trip through an Australian gorge. In fact,
any tour that involves cultural interaction, natural beauty spots, wildlife or a dash of soft
adventure is likely to be included in the overflowing ecotourism folder. There is no doubt
the original motives behind the movement were honourable attempts to provide a way for
those who cared to make informed choices, but the lack of regulations and a standard
industry definition left many travellers lost in an ecotourism jungle.

It is easier to understand why the ecotourism market has become so overcrowded when
we look at its wider role in the world economy. According to World Tourism Organisation
figures, ecotourism is worth US$20 billion a year and makes up one-fifth of all international
tourism. Add to this an annual growth rate of around five per cent and the pressure for
many operators, both in developed and developing countries, to jump on the accelerating
bandwagon is compelling. Without any widely recognised accreditation system, the
consumer has been left to investigate the credentials of an operator themselves. This is a
time-consuming process and many travellers usually take an operator’s claims at face
value, only adding to the proliferation of fake ecotours.
However, there are several simple questions that will provide qualifying evidence of a
company’s commitment to minimise its impact on the environment and maximise the
benefits to the tourism area’s local community. For example, does the company use
recycled or sustainable, locally harvested materials to build its tourist properties? Do they
pay fair wages to all employees? Do they offer training to employees? It is common for city
entrepreneurs to own tour companies in country areas, which can mean the money you
pay ends up in the city rather than in the community being visited. By taking a little extra
time to investigate the ecotourism options, it is not only possible to guide your custom to
worthy operators but you will often find that the experience they offer is far more rewarding.

The ecotourism business is still very much in need of a shake-up and a standardised
approach. There are a few organisations that have sprung up in the last ten years or so
that endeavour to educate travellers and operators about the benefits of responsible
ecotourism. Founded in 1990, the Ecotourism Society (TES) is a non-profit organisation of
travel industry, conservation and ecological professionals, which aims to make ecotourism
a genuine tool for conservation and sustainable development. Helping to create inherent
economic value in wilderness environments and threatened cultures has undoubtedly been
one of the ecotourism movement’s most notable achievements. TES organises an annual
initiative to further aid development of the ecotourism industry. This year it is launching
‘Your Travel Choice Makes a Difference’, an educational campaign aimed at helping
consumers understand the potential positive and negative impacts of their travel decisions.
TES also offers guidance on the choice of ecotour and has established a register of
approved ecotourism operators around the world.

A leading ecotourism operator in the United Kingdom is Tribes, which won the 1999
Tourism Concern and Independent Traveller’s World ‘Award for Most Responsible Tour
Operator’. Amanda Marks, owner and director of Tribes, believes that the ecotourism
industry still has some way to go to get its house in order. Until now, no ecotourism
accreditation scheme has really worked, principally because there has been no systematic
way of checking that accredited companies actually comply with the code of practice.
Amanda believes that the most promising system is the recently re-launched Green Globe
21 scheme. The Green Globe 21 award is based on the sustainable development
standards contained in Agenda 21 from the 1992 Earth Summit and was originally
coordinated by the World Travel & Tourism Council (WTTC). The scheme is now an
independent concern, though the WTTC still supports it. Until recently, tour companies
became affiliates and could use the Green Globe logo merely on payment of an annual fee,
hardly a suitable qualifying standard. However, in November 1999 Green Globe 21
introduced an annual, independent check on operators wishing to use the logo.

Miriam Cain, from the Green Globe 21 marketing development, explains that current and
new affiliates will now have one year to ensure that their operations comply with Agenda 21
standards. If they fail the first inspection, they can only reapply once. The inspection
process is not a cheap option, especially for large companies, but the benefits of having
Green Globe status and the potential operational cost savings that complying with the
standards can bring should be significant. ‘We have joint ventures with organisations
around the world, including Australia and the Caribbean, that will allow us to effectively
check all affiliate operators,’ says Miriam. The scheme also allows destination communities
to become Green Globe 21 approved.

For a relatively new industry it is not surprising that ecotourism has undergone teething
pains. However, there are signs that things are changing for the better. With a committed
and unified approach by the travel industry, local communities, travellers and
environmental experts could make ecotourism a tag to be proud of and trusted.

Questions 1-6

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage 2?

In boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet write

YES if the statement agrees with the writer’s views

NO if the statement contradicts the writer’s views

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
1..................... The term ‘ecotourism’ has become an advertising gimmick.

2..................... The intentions of those who coined the term ‘ecotourism’ were
sincere.

3..................... Ecotourism is growing at a faster rate than any other type of travel.

4..................... It is surprising that so many tour organisations decided to become
involved in ecotourism.

5..................... Tourists have learnt to make investigations about tour operators
before using them.

6..................... Tourists have had bad experiences on ecotour holidays.


Questions 7-9

According to the information given in the reading passage, which THREE of the following
are true of the Ecotourism Society (TES)?

Write the appropriate letters A-F in boxes 7-9 on your answer sheet.

A It has monitored the growth in ecotourism.

B It involves a range of specialists in the field.

C It has received public recognition for the role it performs.

D It sets up regular ecotour promotions.

E It offers information on ecotours at an international level.

F It consults with people working in tourist destinations


Questions 10-11

According to the information given in the reading passage, which TWO of the following are
true of the Green Globe 21 award?

Write the appropriate letters A-D in boxes 10-11 on your answer sheet.

A The scheme is self-regulating.
B Amanda Marks was recruited to develop the award.

C Prior to 1999 companies were not required to pay for membership.

D Both tour operators and tour sites can apply for affiliation.

E It intends to reduce the number of ecotour operators.


Questions 12-14

Using NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS, answer the following questions.

Write your answers in boxes 12-14 on your answer sheet.

12 Which body provides information on global tourist numbers? 12.....................
13 Who often gains financially from tourism in rural environments? 13.....................

14 Which meeting provided the principles behind the Green Globe 21
regulations? 14.....................

Solution:

8. B OR D OR E IN
1. YES
EITHER ORDER
9. B OR D OR E IN
2. YES
EITHER ORDER
10. A OR D IN
3. NOT GIVEN
EITHER ORDER
11. A OR D IN
4. NO
EITHER ORDER
12. World Tourism
5. NO
Organisation
13. city
6. NOT GIVEN
entrepreneurs
7. B OR D OR E IN 14. 1992 Earth
EITHER ORDER Summit
