TITLE: Lack of sleep
INDEX: 239
============================================================

Lack of sleep

Section A
It is estimated that the average man or woman needs between seven-and-a-half and eight
hours' sleep a night. Some can manage on a lot less. Baroness Thatcher, for example, was
reported to be able to get by on four hours' sleep a night when she was Prime Minister of
Britain. Dr Jill Wilkinson, senior lecturer in psychology at Surrey University and co-author of
'Psychology in Counselling and Therapeutic Practice', states that healthy individuals
sleeping less than five hours or even as little as two hours in every 24 hours are rare, but
represent a sizeable minority.

Section B
The latest beliefs are that the main purposes of sleep are to enable the body to rest and
replenish, allowing time for repairs to take place and for tissue to be regenerated. One
supporting piece of evidence for this rest-and-repair theory is that production of the growth
hormone somatotropin, which helps tissue to regenerate, peaks while we are asleep. Lack
of sleep, however, can compromise the immune system, muddle thinking, cause
depression, promote anxiety and encourage irritability.

Section C
Researchers in San Diego deprived a group of men of sleep between 1am and 5am on just
one night, and found that levels of their bodies' natural defences against viral infections had
fallen significantly when measured the following morning. 'Sleep is essential for our
physical and emotional well-being and there are few aspects of daily living that are not
disrupted by the lack of it', says Professor William Regelson of Virginia University, a
specialist in insomnia. 'Because it can seriously undermine the functioning of the immune
system, sufferers are vulnerable to infection.'

Section D
For many people, lack of sleep is rarely a matter of choice. Some have problems getting to
sleep, others with staying asleep until the morning. Despite popular belief that sleep is one
long event, research shows that, in an average night, there are five stages of sleep and
four cycles, during which the sequence of stages is repeated.

In the first light phase, the heart rate and blood pressure go down and the muscles relax. In
the next two stages, sleep gets progressively deeper. In stage four, usually reached after
an hour, the slumber is so deep that, if awoken, the sleeper would be confused and
disorientated. It is in this phase that sleep-walking can occur, with an average episode
lasting no more than 15 minutes.

In the fifth stage, the rapid eye movement (REM) stage, the heartbeat quickly gets back to
normal levels, brain activity accelerates to daytime heights and above and the eyes move
constantly beneath closed lids as if the sleeper is looking at something. During this stage,
the body is almost paralysed. This REM phase is also the time when we dream.

Section E
Sleeping patterns change with age, which is why many people over 60 develop insomnia.
In America, that age group consumes almost half the sleep medication on the market. One
theory for the age-related change is that it is due to hormonal changes. The temperature
General Training: Reading and Writing rise occurs at daybreak in the young, but at three or
four in the morning in the elderly. Age aside, it is estimated that roughly one in three people
suffer some kind of sleep disturbance. Causes can be anything from pregnancy and stress
to alcohol and heart disease. Smoking is a known handicap to sleep, with one survey
showing that ex-smokers got to sleep in 18 minutes rather than their earlier average of 52
minutes.

Section F
Apart from self-help therapy such as regular exercise, there are psychological treatments,
including relaxation training and therapy aimed at getting rid of pre-sleep worries and
anxieties. There is also sleep reduction therapy, where the aim is to improve sleep quality
by strictly regulating the time people go to bed and when they get up. Medication is
regarded by many as a last resort and often takes the form of sleeping pills, normally
benzodiazepines, which are minor tranquillisers.

Section G
Professor Regelson advocates the use of melatonin for treating sleep disorders. Melatonin
is a naturally secreted hormone, located in the pineal gland deep inside the brain. The main
function of the hormone is to control the body's biological clock, so we know when to sleep
and when to wake. The gland detects light reaching it through the eye; when there is no
light, it secretes the melatonin into the bloodstream, lowering the body temperature and
helping to induce sleep. Melatonin pills contain a synthetic version of the hormone and are
commonly used for jet lag as well as for sleep disturbance. John Nicholls, sales manager of
one of America's largest health food shops, claims that sales of the pill have increased
dramatically. He explains that it is sold in capsules, tablets, lozenges and mixed with herbs.
It is not effective for all insomniacs, but many users have weaned themselves off sleeping
tablets as a result of its application.

Questions 1-8

The passage has seven sections labelled A-G.

Which section contains the following information?

Write the correct letter A-G in boxes 1-8 on your answer sheet.


NB You may use any letter more than once.

1..................... the different amounts of sleep that people require

2..................... an investigation into the results of sleep deprivation


3..................... some reasons why people may suffer from sleep disorders

4..................... lifestyle changes which can help overcome sleep-related problems


5..................... a process by which sleep helps us to remain mentally and physically healthy


6..................... claims about a commercialised man-made product for sleeplessness

7..................... the role of physical changes in sleeping habits


8..................... the processes involved during sleep


Questions 9-13
Do the following statements agree with the information given in the passage.


In boxes 9-13 on your answer sheet, write
TRUE if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this


9..................... Sleep can cure some illnesses.


10..................... The various stages of sleep occur more than once a night.

11..................... Dreaming and sleep-walking occur at similar stages of sleep.


12..................... Sleepers move around a lot during the REM stage of sleep.

13..................... The body temperature rises relatively early in elderly people.
4

Solution:

1. A 8. D
2. C 9. NOT GIVEN

3. E 10. TRUE
4. F 11. FALSE

5. B 12. FALSE
6. G 13. TRUE

7. E
