TITLE: LAND OF THE RISING SUN
INDEX: 240
============================================================

LAND OF THE RISING SUN

A

Japan has a significantly better record in terms of average mathematical attainment than
England and Wales. Large sample international comparisons of pupils' attainments since
the 1960s have established that not only did Japanese pupils at age 13 have better scores
of average attainment, but there was also a larger proportion of 'low' attainers in England,
where, incidentally, the variation in attainment scores was much greater. The percentage of
Gross National Product spent on education is reasonably similar in the two countries, so
how is this higher and more consistent attainment in maths achieved?

B

Lower secondary schools in Japan cover three school years, from the seventh grade (age
13) to the ninth grade (age 15). Virtually all pupils at this stage attend state schools: only 3
per cent are in the private sector. Schools are usually modem in design, set well back from
the road and spacious inside. Classrooms are large and pupils sit at single desks in rows.
Lessons last for a standardised 50 minutes and are always followed by a 10-minute break,
which gives the pupils a chance to let off steam. Teachers begin with a formal address and
mutual bowing, and then concentrate on whole-class teaching.

Classes are large - usually about 40 - and are unstreamed. Pupils stay in the same class
for all lessons throughout the school and develop considerable class identity and loyalty.
Pupils attend the school in their own neighbourhood, which in theory removes ranking by
school. In practice in Tokyo, because of the relative concentration of schools, there is some
competition to get into the 'better' school in a particular area.

C

Traditional ways of teaching form the basis of the lesson and the remarkably quiet classes
take their own notes of the points made and the examples demonstrated. Everyone has
their own copy of the textbook supplied by the central education authority, Monbusho, as
part of the concept of free compulsory education up to the age of 15. These textbooks are,
on the whole, small, presumably inexpensive to produce, but well set out and logically
developed. (One teacher was particularly keen to introduce colour and pictures into maths
textbooks: he felt this would make them more accessible to pupils brought up in a cartoon
culture.) Besides approving textbooks, Monbusho also decides the highly centralised
national curriculum and how it is to be delivered.

D

Lessons all follow the same pattern. At the beginning, the pupils put solutions to the
homework on the board, then the teachers comment, correct or elaborate as necessary.
Pupils mark their own homework: this is an important principle in Japanese schooling as it
enables pupils to see where and why they made a mistake, so that these can be avoided in
future. No one minds mistakes or ignorance as long as you are prepared to learn from
them.

After the homework has been discussed, the teacher explains the topic of the lesson,
slowly and with a lot of repetition and elaboration. Examples are demonstrated on the
board; questions from the textbook are worked through first with the class, and then the
class is set questions from the textbook to do individually. Only rarely are supplementary
worksheets distributed in a maths class. The impression is that the logical nature of the
textbooks and their comprehensive coverage of different types of examples, combined with
the relative homogeneity of the class, renders work sheets unnecessary. At this point,
the teacher would circulate and make sure that all the pupils were coping well.
E

It is remarkable that large, mixed-ability classes could be kept together for maths
throughout all their compulsory schooling from 6 to 15. Teachers say that they give
individual help at the end of a lesson or after school, setting extra work if necessary. In
observed lessons, any strugglers would be assisted by the teacher or quietly seek help
from their neighbour. Carefully fostered class identity makes pupils keen to help each other
- anyway, it is in their interests since the class progresses together.

This scarcely seems adequate help to enable slow learners to keep up. However, the
Japanese attitude towards education runs along the lines of 'if you work hard enough, you
can do almost anything'. Parents are kept closely informed of their children's progress and
will play a part in helping their children to keep up with class, sending them to 'Juku'
(private evening tuition) if extra help is needed and encouraging them to work harder. It
seems to work, at least for 95 per cent of the school population.

F

So what are the major contributing factors in the success of maths teaching? Clearly,
attitudes are important. Education is valued greatly in Japanese culture; maths is
recognised as an important compulsory subject throughout schooling; and the emphasis is
on hard work coupled with a focus on accuracy.

Other relevant points relate to the supportive attitude of a class towards slower pupils, the
lack of competition within a class, and the positive emphasis on learning for oneself and
improving one's own standard. And the view of repetitively boring lessons and learning the
facts by heart, which is sometimes quoted in relation to Japanese classes, may be unfair
and unjustified. No poor maths lessons were observed. They were mainly good and one or
two were inspirational.

Questions 1-5

Reading Passage 1 has six sections, A-F.

Choose the correct heading for sections B-F from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-ix, in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.


List of Headings
i The influence of Monbusho
ii Helping less successful students
iii The success of compulsory education
iv Research findings concerning achievements in maths
v The typical format of a maths lesson
vi Comparative expenditure on maths education
vii Background to middle-years education in Japan
viii The key to Japanese successes in maths education
ix The role of homework correction


Example Answer

Section A iv

1 Section B 1.....................

2 Section C 2.....................
3 Section D 3.....................

4 Section E 4.....................

5 Section F 5.....................


Questions 6-9

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage 1?

In boxes 6-9 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
6..................... There is a wider range of achievement amongst English pupils studying
maths than amongst their Japanese counterparts.

7..................... The percentage of Gross National Product spent on education generally
reflects the level of attainment in mathematics.

8..................... Private schools in Japan are more modern and spacious than state-run
lower secondary schools.

9..................... Teachers mark homework in Japanese schools.


Questions 10-13

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet.

10 Maths textbooks in Japanese schools are

A cheap for pupils to buy.

B well organised and adapted to the needs of the pupils.

C written to be used in conjunction with TV programmes.
D not very popular with many Japanese teachers.


11 When a new maths topic is introduced,

A students answer questions on the board.

B students rely entirely on the textbook.

C it is carefully and patiently explained to the students.

D it is usual for students to use extra worksheets.


12 How do schools deal with students who experience difficulties?

A They are given appropriate supplementary tuition.

B They are encouraged to copy from other pupils.

C They are forced to explain their slow progress.

D They are placed in a mixed-ability class.


13 Why do Japanese students tend to achieve relatively high rates of success in maths?

A It is a compulsory subject in Japan.
B They are used to working without help from others.

C Much effort is made and correct answers are emphasised.

D There is a strong emphasis on repetitive learning.

Solution:

1. vii 8. NOT GIVEN
2. i 9. NO

3. v 10. B
4. ii 11. C

5. viii 12. A
6. YES 13. C

7. NO
