TITLE: Last man standing
INDEX: 243
============================================================

Last man standing

Some 50,000 years ago, Homo sapiens beat other hominids to become the only
surviving species. Kate Ravilious reveals how we did it.

A Today, there are over seven billion people living on Earth. No other species has exerted
as much influence over the planet as us. But turn the clock back 80,000 years and we were
one of a number of species roaming the Earth. Our own species. Homo sapiens (Latin for
’wise man'), was most successful in Africa. In western Eurasia, the Neanderthals
dominated, while Homo erectus may have lived in Indonesia. Meanwhile, an unusual finger
bone and tooth, discovered in Denisova cave in Siberia in 2008, have led scientists to
believe that yet another human population - the Denisovans - may also have been
widespread across Asia. Somewhere along the line, these other human species died out,
leaving Homo sapiens as the sole survivor. So what made us the winners in the battle for
survival?

B Some 74.000 years ago, the Toba ‘supervolcano' on the Indonesian island of Sumatra
erupted. The scale of the event was so great that ash from the eruption was flung as far as
eastern India, more than 2,000 kilometres away. Oxford archaeologist Mike Petraglia and
his team have uncovered thousands of stone tools buried underneath the Toba ash. The
mix of hand axes and spear tips have led Petraglia to speculate that Homo sapiens and
Homo erectus were both living in eastern India prior to the Toba eruption. Based on careful
examination of the tools and dating of the sediment layers where they were found.

Petraglia and his team suggest that Homo sapiens arrived in eastern India around 78.000
years ago. migrating out of Africa and across Arabia during a favourable climate period.
After their arrival, the simple tools belonging to Homo erectus seemed to lessen in number
and eventually disappear completely. 'We think that Homo sapiens had a more efficient
hunting technology, which could have given them the edge.' says Petraglia. 'Whether the
eruption of Toba also played a role in the extinction of the Homo erectus-like species is
unclear to us.'

C Some 45.000 years later, another fight for survival took place. This time, the location was
Europe and the protagonists were another species, the Neanderthals.

They were a highly successful species that dominated the European landscape for 300.000
years. Yet within just a few thousand years of the arrival of Homo sapiens, their numbers
plummeted. They eventually disappeared from the landscape around 30.000 years ago.
with their last known refuge being southern Iberia, including Gibraltar. Initially. Homo
sapiens and Neanderthals lived alongside each other and had no reason to compete. But
then Europe’s climate swung into a cold, inhospitable, dry phase. ‘Neanderthal and Homo
sapiens populations had to retreat to refugia (pockets of habitable land). This heightened
competition between the two groups,’ explains Chris Stringer, anthropologist at the Natural
History Museum in London.

D Both species were strong and stockier than the average human today, but Neanderthals
were particularly robust. ‘Their skeletons show that they had broad shoulders and thick
necks,' says Stringer. ‘Homo sapiens, on the other hand, had longer forearms, which
undoubtedly enabled them to throw a spear from some distance, with less danger and
using relatively little energy,’ explains Stringer. This long-range ability may have given
Homo sapiens an advantage in hunting. When it came to keeping warm. Homo sapiens
had another skill: weaving and sewing. Archaeologists have uncovered simple needles
fashioned from ivory and bone alongside Homo sapiens, dating as far back as 35,000
years ago. ‘Using this technology, we could use animal skins to make ourselves tents,
warm clothes and fur boots,’ says Stringer. In contrast. Neanderthals never seemed to
master sewing skills, instead relying on pinning skins together with thorns.

E A thirst for exploration provided Homo sapiens with another significant advantage over
Neanderthals. Objects such as shell beads and flint tools, discovered many miles from their
source, show that our ancestors travelled over large distances, in order to barter and
exchange useful materials, and share ideas and knowledge. By contrast. Neanderthals
tended to keep themselves to themselves, living in small groups. They misdirected their
energies by only gathering resources from their immediate surroundings and perhaps
failing to discover new technologies outside their territory.

F Some of these differences in behaviour may have emerged because the two species
thought in different ways. By comparing skull shapes, archaeologists have shown that
Homo sapiens had a more developed temporal lobe - the regions at the side of the brain,
associated with listening, language and long-term memory. 'We think that Homo sapiens
had a significantly more complex language than Neanderthals and were able to
comprehend and discuss concepts such as the distant past and future.' says Stringer.
Penny Spikins, an archaeologist at the University of York, has recently suggested that

Homo sapiens may also have had a greater diversity of brain types than Neanderthals.
‘Our research indicates that high-precision tools, new hunting technologies and the
development of symbolic communication may all have come about because they were
willing to include people with "different" minds and specialised roles in their society,’ she
explains. 'We see similar kinds of injuries on male and female Neanderthal skeletons,
implying there was no such division of labour,' says Spikins.

G Thus by around 30,000 years ago. many talents and traits were well established in Homo
sapiens societies but still absent from Neanderthal communities. Stringer thinks that the
Neanderthals were just living in the wrong place at the wrong time. 'They had to compete
with Homo sapiens during a phase of very unstable climate across Europe. During each
rapid climate fluctuation, they may have suffered greater losses of people than Homo
sapiens, and thus were slowly worn down,’ he says. ‘If the climate had remained stable
throughout, they might still be here.’

Questions 1-5

The reading passage has seven paragraphs, A-G.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

1..................... a comparison of a range of physical features of Neanderthals and Homo
sapiens

2..................... reference to items that were once used for trade

3..................... mention of evidence for the existence of a previously unknown human
species

4..................... mention of the part played by i.l fortune in the downfall of Neanderthal
society

5..................... reference to the final geographical location of Nediidei tlials


Questions 6-9

Complete the sentences below.

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from the passage for each answer.

6 Analysis of stone tools and 6..................... has enabled Petraglia’s team to put forward
an arrival date for Homo sapiens in eastern India.

7 Homo sapiens used both 7..................... to make sewing implements.
8 The territorial nature of Neanderthals may have limited their ability to acquire
resources and 8.....................
9 Archaeologists examined 9..................... in order to get an insight into Neanderthal and

Homo sapiens' capacity for language and thought.


Questions 10-13

Look at the following statements and the list of researchers, A-C, below.

Match each statement with the correct researcher.

10..................... No evidence can be found to suggest that Neanderthal communities
allocated tasks to different members.
11..................... Homo sapiens may have been able to plan ahead.

12..................... Scientists cannot be sure whether a sudden natural disaster contributed
to the loss of a human species.

13..................... Environmental conditions restricted the areas where Homo sapiens and
Neanderthals could live.
List of Researchers


A Mike Petraglia

B Chris Stringer

C Penny Spikins

Solution:

1. D 8. new technologies
2. E 9. skull shapes

3. A 10. C
4. G 11. B

5. C 12. A
6. sediment
13. B
layers
7. ivory and bone
