TITLE: Less Television, Less Violence and Aggression
INDEX: 250
============================================================

Less Television, Less Violence and Aggression

Cutting back on television, videos, and video games reduces acts of aggression among
schoolchildren, according to a study by Dr. Thomas Robinson and others from the Stanford
University School of Medicine. The study, published in the January 2001 issue of the
Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, found that third- and fourth-grade students
who took part in a curriculum to reduce their TV, video, and video game use engaged in
fewer acts of verbal and physical aggression than their peers. The study took place in two
similar San Jose, California, elementary schools. Students in one school underwent an 18-
lesson, 6-month program designed to limit their media usage, while the others did not. Both
groups of students had similar reports of aggressive behavior at the beginning of the study.
After the six-month program, however, the two groups had very real differences. The
students who cut back on their TV time engaged in six fewer acts of verbal aggression per
hour and rated 2.4 percent fewer of their classmates as aggressive after the program.

Physical acts of violence, parental reports of aggressive behavior, and perceptions of a
mean and scary world also decreased, but the authors suggest further study to solidify
these results.

Although many studies have shown that children who watch a lot of TV are more likely to
act violently, this report further verifies that television, videos, and video games actually
cause the violent behavior, and it is among the first to evaluate a solution to the problem.
Teachers at the intervention school included the program in their existing curriculum. Early
lessons encouraged students to keep tract of and report on the time they spent watching
TV or videos, or playing Video games, to motivate them to limit those activities on their
own. The initial lessons were followed by TV-Turnoff, an organization that encourages less
TV viewing. For ten days, students were challenged to go without television, videos, or
video games. After that, teachers encouraged the students to stay within a media
allowance of seven hours per week. Almost all students participated in the Turnoff, and
most stayed under their budget for the following weeks. Additional lessons encouraged
children to use their time more selectively, and many of the final lessons had students
themselves advocate reducing screen activities.

This study is by no means the first to find a link between television and violence. Virtually
all of 3,500 research studies on the subject in the past 40 years have shown the same
relationship, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics. Among the most
noteworthy studies is Dr. Leonard D. Eron’s, which found that exposure to television
violence in childhood is the strongest predictor of aggressive behavior later in life—stronger
even than violent behavior as children. The more violent television the subjects watched at
age eight, the more serious was their aggressive behavior even 22 years later. Another
study by Dr. Brandon S. Centerwall found that murder rates climb after the introduction of
television. In the United States and Canada, murder rates doubled 10 to 15 years after the
introduction of television, after the first TV generation grew up.

Centerwall tested this pattern in South Africa, where television broadcasts were banned
until 1975. Murder rates in South Africa remained relatively steady from the mid-1940s
through the mid- 1970s. By 1987, however, the murder rate had increased 130 percent
from its 1974 level. The murder rates in the United States and Canada had leveled1 off in
the meantime. Centerwall's study implies that the medium of television, not just the content,
promotes violence and the current study by Dr. Robinson supports that conclusion. The
Turnoff did not specifically target violent television, nor did the following allowance period.
Reducing television in general reduces aggressive behavior. Even television that is not
“violent” is more violent than real life and may lead viewers to believe that violence is funny,
inconsequential, and a viable solution to problems. Also, watching television of any content
robs us of the time to interact with real people. Watching too much TV may inhibit the skills
and patience we need to get along with others without resorting to aggression. TV, as a
medium, promotes aggression and violence. The best solution is to turn it off.

Questions 1-7

Complete the summary using words from the box below. Write your answers in boxes 1-
7 on your Answer Sheet

A study that was published in January 2001 found that when children 1..................... less,
they behaved less 2......................

Students in a California elementary school participated in the study, which lasted
3......................

By the end of the study, the children’s behavior had changed.

For example, the children’s 4..................... reported that the children were acting less
violently than before.

During the study, the children kept a record of the 5..................... they watched TV. Then,
for ten days, they 6......................

Near the end of the study, the students began to suggest watching 7......................

parents eighteen days
teachers classmates
six months nonviolent programs
violently time of day
watched TV number of hours
scared avoided TV
less TV favorite programs


Questions 8-11

Do the following statements agree with the information in Reading Passage 2? in boxes 8-
11 write

TRUE if the statement is true according to the passage.
FALSE if the statement contradicts the passage.

NOT GIVENif there is no information about this in the passage.


8..................... Only one study has found a connection between TV and violent behavior.

9..................... There were more murders in Canada after people began watching TV.

10..................... The United States has more violence on TV than other countries.

11..................... TV was introduced in South Africa in the 1940s.

Questions 12-13

For each question, choose the correct letter A-D and write it in boxes 12 and 13 on your
Answer Sheet

12 According to the passage,

A only children are affected by violence on TV.

B only violent TV programs cause violent behavior.

C children who watch too much TV get poor grades in school..

D watching a lot of TV may beep us from learning important social shills.

13 The authors of this passage believe that

A some violent TV programs are funny.
B the best plan is to stop watching TV completely.

C it’s better to watch TV with other people than on your own.

D seven hours a week of TV watching is acceptable.

Solution:

1. watched tv/television 8. FALSE
2. violently 9. TRUE

3. 6/six months 10. NOT GIVEN
4. parents 11. NOT GIVEN

5. number of hours 12. D
6. avoided tv/television 13. B

7. less tv/television
