TITLE: Life in an international orchestra
INDEX: 254
============================================================

Life in an international orchestra

A
Playing in a big international orchestra is one of life's most exciting experiences, yet it is
also a very tough job. Players are part of a team of eighty or more musicians playing some
of the world's greatest music. They work very long hours - turning up early for rehearsals
on dark, cold, winter's mornings in a chilly, empty hall; working till late in the evening on the
night of a concert; travelling on trains and planes at all hours of the day and night; eating
and sleeping when they can; trying to play well when they are tired or hungry or have a
headache. There's not much time left for home, family or friends. In fact, their 'family' is the
rest of the orchestra. The musicians share the hectic pace and the worries, but they also
share the wonderful moments when they are all playing together and feel on top of the
world.

B
Much of an orchestra's time is spent in rehearsal. The players may already know the music
by heart, but every conductor has his or her own ideas about how a piece of music should
be played. That is one reason why rehearsals are necessary. Another reason is the
problem of orchestral balance of sound. With the rest of the orchestra around them, players
cannot always hear themselves properly (sometimes not at all), and so they cannot gauge
the balance of sound between their own instruments or section and the rest of the
orchestra. At rehearsals this is something that the conductor is able to put right.

C
Some conductors like to go through a piece of music bar by bar, stopping the orchestra
each time they want to make a comment. Others let an orchestra play for long stretches at
a time, then go back to a particular point they want to rehearse again. Whatever the
conductor's method, it is important that the musicians are happy with it. If the players don't
like the conductor they can become very difficult, interrupting the session with questions or
complaints. At one time conductors, such as Toscanini, used to get such fine performances
out of an orchestra by shouting at the musicians and almost frightening them into playing
well. That sort of behaviour would not work with most orchestras today. After all, orchestral
musicians are highly trained and experienced people and they should be treated with
respect.
D

If a rehearsal is held in the morning of a concert, it probably takes place in the concert hall.
In the morning, everybody will still be in casual clothes but in the evening they will change
into formal dress. Most will arrive at least an hour early to unpack and inspect their
instruments - violinists to check their strings and bow, woodwind players to check their
reeds and change them if need be, and everyone to run over any difficult passages of
music. If they want a bit of peace and quiet some members of the orchestra may even hide
themselves away in the toilets or creep down to the boiler room! Players whose
instruments are too big for them to carry, such as timpani, harps and double-basses, will
arrive on the platform before the rest to make their last minute checks.

E
About five minutes before the concert is due to start, everybody except the leader or
concert master, files on and takes their place. Then the leader comes on to a round of
applause from the audience and calls for silence, while the oboist sounds the note A. The
rest of the orchestra tune their instruments to this note. Finally, on comes the conductor, to
more applause, and, when there is quiet once more, the concert begins.

F
However well the orchestra may have rehearsed, problems may still occur. In a warm,
crowded concert hall the acoustics are different from those in a cool, empty building, and
this can change the balance of the sound. Also, the instruments may go out of tune after
some time in a warm atmosphere.
G

Musicians, like actors, are aware of the audience; they notice whether the audience is a
good one or not. A good audience will listen and respond to the music, whereas a difficult
audience coughs and fidgets throughout the performance. Above all, the musicians are
also aware of whether they are playing well, not just individually but as a team. Knowing
they are giving a good performance makes all the difference at the end of a long, hard day.

Questions 1-6

The reading passage has seven paragraphs (A-G).
Choose the correct heading for Paragraphs A-G from the list of headings (i-x) below.

Write your answers in boxes 1-6 on the answer sheet.

NB There are more headings than paragraphs so you will not use all of them.

Example Answer
Paragraph F iii


List of Headings

The need
for a high
i
quality
instrument
Formalities
at the
i
beginning
i
of the
concert
Problems
i with
i changes in
i sound in
the hall

Poor and
i ineffective
v conducting
method

The highs
and lows of
being a
v
member of
an
orchestra
Pre-concert
v
arrangeme
i
nts
The
v
response of
i
the
i
audience
v The need
i
for detailed
i
rehearsal
i
The
importance
i of the
x conductor's
manageme
nt style

Correct
adjustment
x
of each
instrument


1..................... Paragraph A

2..................... Paragraph B

3..................... Paragraph C

4..................... Paragraph D

5..................... Paragraph E

6..................... Paragraph G


Questions 7-13

Choose the letter A-D that gives the best completion to each sentence below for the
orchestra passage.

Write your answers in boxes 7-13 on the answer sheet.

7. Playing in a large orchestra requires long hours because

A there are very many members in the team.
B the rehearsals take a lot of time.
C hotel accommodation is not always satisfactory.
D players are sometimes absent because they are sick.


8. Frequent rehearsals may be needed because

A the musicians are occasionally worried.
B the conductor must correct players' mistakes.
C the players may not know each piece of music.
D the volume of the instruments needs to be adjusted.
9. An effective conductor is one who

A has the players' approval.
B forces the team to play well.
C explains everything to the players.
D allows no interruption to the rehearsal.


10. Today, a conductor who loudly criticises the players

A is showing them respect.
B can expect insults from them.
C will force them to play well.

D will not get good music from them.

11. On the evening of a concert, the players, will

A visit the changing rooms.
B arrive at the hall too early.

C make sure their instruments are working properly.
D check they have their formal clothing.


12. Problems in a concert may occur if

A the hall temperature changes.
B the audience does not applaud the conductor.
C the players are playing an unfamiliar piece of music.
D the conductor doesn't go through the music bar by bar.

13. Players feel satisfaction in their music when

A they have rehearsed well.
B they have worked a long hard day.
C the whole orchestra plays well together.
D the audience is happy.

Solution:

1. v 8. D
2. viii 9. A

3. ix 10. D
4. vi 11. C

5. ii 12. A
6. vii 13. C

7. B
