TITLE: London Swaying Footbridge
INDEX: 258
============================================================

London Swaying Footbridge

A. In September 1996 a competition was organized by the Financial Times in association
with the London Borough of Southwark to design a new footbridge across the Thames. The
competition attracted over 200 entries and was won by a team comprising Arup
(engineers), Foster and Partners (architects) and the sculptor Sir Anthony Caro.

B. The bridge opened to the public on 10 June 2000. Up to 100,000 people crossed it that
day with up to 2000 people on the bridge at any one time. At first, the bridge was still. Then
it began to sway just slightly. Then, almost from one moment to the next, when large
groups of people were crossing, the wobble intensified. This movement became sufficiently
large for people to stop walking to retain their balance and sometimes to hold onto the
hand rails for support. It was decided immediately to limit the number of people on the
bridge, but even so the deck movement was sufficient to be uncomfortable and to raise
concern for public safety so that on 12 June the bridge was closed until the problem could
be solved.


C. The embarrassed engineers found the videotape that day which showed the center span
swaying about 3 inches side to side every second. The engineers first thought that winds
might be exerting excessive force on the many large flags and banners bedecking the
bridge for its gala premiere. What’s more, they also discovered that the pedestrians also
played a key role. Human activities, such as walking, running, jumping, swaying, etc. could
cause horizontal force which in turn could cause excessive dynamic vibration in the lateral
direction in the bridge. As the structure began moving, pedestrians adjusted their gait to the
same lateral rhythm as the bridge. The adjusted footsteps magnified the motion – just like
when four people all stand up in a small boat at the same time. As more pedestrians locked
into the same rhythm, the increasing oscillations led to the dramatic swaying captured on
film.

D. In order to design a method of reducing the movements, the force exerted by the
pedestrians had to be quantified and related to the motion of the bridge. Although there are
some descriptions of this phenomenon in existing literature, none of these actually
quantifies the force. So there was no quantitative analytical way to design the bridge
against this effect. An immediate research program was launched by the bridge’s
engineering designers Ove Arup, supported by a number of universities and research
organizations.

E. The tests at the University of Southampton involved a person walking ‘on the spot’ on a
small shake table. The tests at Imperial College involved persons walking along a specially
built, 7.2m-long platform which could be driven laterally at different frequencies (n and
amplitudes. Each type of test had its limitations. The Imperial College tests were only able
to capture 7-8 footsteps, and the ‘walking on the spot’ tests, although monitoring many
footsteps, could not investigate normal forward walking. Neither test could investigate any
influence of other people in a crowd on the behavior of the individual being tested.


F. The results of the laboratory tests provided information which enabled the initial design
of a retro-fit to be progressed. However, the limitations of these tests was clear and it was
felt that the only way to replicate properly the precise conditions of the Millennium Bridge
was to carry out crowd tests on the bridge deck itself. These tests done by the Arup
engineers could incorporate factors not possible in the laboratory tests. The first of these
was carried out with 100 people in July 2000. The results of these tests were used to refine
the load model for the pedestrians. A second series of crowd tests was carried out on the
bridge in December 2000. The purpose of these tests was to further validate the design
assumptions and to load test a prototype damper installation. The test was carried out with
275 people.

G. Unless the usage of the bridge was to be greatly restricted, only two generic options to
improve its performance were considered feasible. The first was to increase the stiffness of
the bridge to move all its lateral natural frequencies out of the range that could be excited
by the lateral footfall forces, and the second was to increase the damping of the bridge to
reduce the resonant response.

Questions 1-4

Choose FOUR letters, A-H.

Write the correct letters in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.

Which FOUR of the following situation were witnessed on the opening ceremony of the
bridge?


A The frequency of oscillation increased after some time

B All the engineers went to see the ceremony that day

C The design of the bridge astonished the people

D Unexpected sideway movement of the bridge occurred

E Pedesfrians had difficulty in walking on the deck
F The bridge fell down when people tried to retain their balance

G Vibration could be detected on the deck by the pedestrians

H It was raining when the ceremony began


Questions 5-9

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage using NO MORE

THAN THREE WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 5-9 on your answer sheet

After the opening ceremony, the embarrassed engineers tried to find out the reason of the
bridge’s wobbling. Judged from the videotape, they thought that 5.....................

and 6.....................might create excessive force on the bridge. The distribution
of 7..................... resulted from human activities could cause 8..................... throughout the
structure. This swaying prompted people to start adjusting the way they walk, which in turn
reinforced the 9......................


Questions 10-13

Complete the table below.

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from Reading Passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet.


Research programs launched by universities and organizations

Universities / People Activity
Test at 10..................... Limited ability to have 7-8 footsteps
‘walking on the spot’ at Southampton Not enough data on 11.....................
Crowd test conducted by 12.....................Aim to verify 13.....................

Solution:

1. A 8. vibration
2. D 9. motion

3. E 10. Imperial College
11. normal forward
4. G
walking
5. winds 12. Arup engineers

13. design
6. pedestrians
assumptions
7. forces
