TITLE: Makete Integrated Rural Transport Project
INDEX: 263
============================================================

Makete Integrated Rural Transport Project

Section A

The disappointing results of many conventional road transport projects in Africa led some
experts to rethink the strategy by which rural transport problems were to be tackled at the
beginning of the 1980s. A request for help in improving the availability of transport within
the remote Makete District of southwestern Tanzania presented the opportunity to try a
new approach.

The concept of 'integrated rural transport' was adopted in the task of examining the
transport needs of the rural households in the district. The objective was to reduce the time
and effort needed to obtain access to essential goods and services through an improved
rural transport system. The underlying assumption was that the time saved would be used
instead for activities that would improve the social and economic development of the
communities. The Makete Integrated Rural Transport Project (MIRTP) started in 1985 with
financial support from the Swiss Development Corporation and was co-ordinated with the
help of the Tanzanian government.

Section B

When the project began, Makete District was virtually totally isolated during the rainy
season.The regional road was in such bad shape that access to the main towns was
impossible for about three months of the year Road traffic was extremely rare within the
district, and alternative means of transport were restricted to donkeys in the north of the
district. People relied primarily on the paths, which were slippery and dangerous during the
rains.

Before solutions could be proposed, the problems had to be understood. Little was known
about the transport demands of the rural households, so Phase I, between December 1985
and December 1987, focused on research.The socio-economic survey of more than 400
households in the district indicated that a household in Makete spent, on average, seven
hours a day on transporting themselves and their goods, a figure which seemed extreme
but which has also been obtained in surveys in other rural areas in Africa. Interesting facts
regarding transport were found: 95% was on foot; 80% was within the locality; and
70% was related to the collection of water and firewood and travelling to grinding mills.

Section C

Having determined the main transport needs, possible solutions were identified which
might reduce the time and burden. During Phase II, from January to February 1991, a
number of approaches were implemented in an effort to improve mobility and access to
transport.

An improvement of the road network was considered necessary to ensure the import and
export of goods to the district.These improvements were carried out using methods that
were heavily dependent on labour In addition to the improvement of roads, these methods
provided training in the operation of a mechanical workshop and bus and truck services.
However the difference from the conventional approach was that this time consideration
was given to local transport needs outside the road network.
Most goods were transported along the paths that provide short-cuts up and down the
hillsides, but the paths were a real safety risk and made the journey on foot even more
arduous. It made sense to improve the paths by building steps, handrails and footbridges.

It was uncommon to find means of transport that were more efficient than walking but less
technologically advanced than motor vehicles. The use of bicycles was constrained by their
high cost and the lack of available spare parts. Oxen were not used at all but donkeys were
used by a few households in the northern part of the district. MIRTP focused on what would
be most appropriate for the inhabitants of Makete in terms of what was available, how
much they could afford and what they were willing to accept.

After careful consideration, the project chose the promotion of donkeys - a donkey costs
less than a bicycle - and the introduction of a locally manufacturable wheelbarrow.

Section D
At the end of Phase II, it was clear that the selected approaches to Makete’s transport
problems had had different degrees of success. Phase III, from March 1991 to March 1993,
focused on the refinement and institutionalisation of these activities.
The road improvements and accompanying maintenance system had helped make the
district centre accessible throughout the year. Essential goods from outside the district had
become more readily available at the market, and prices did not fluctuate as much as they
had done before.

Paths and secondary roads were improved only at the request of communities who were
willing to participate in construction and maintenance. However the improved paths
impressed the inhabitants, and requests for assistance greatly increased soon after only a
few improvements had been completed.

The efforts to improve the efficiency of the existing transport services were not very
successful because most of the motorised vehicles in the district broke down and there
were no resources to repair them. Even the introduction of low-cost means of transport was
difficult because of the general poverty of the district.The locally manufactured
wheelbarrows were still too expensive for all but a few of the households. Modifications to
the original design by local carpenters cut production time and costs. Other
local carpenters have been trained in the new design so that they can respond to requests.
Nevertheless, a locally produced wooden wheelbarrow which costs around 5000
Tanzanian shillings (less than US$20) in Makete, and is about one quarter the cost of a
metal wheelbarrow, is still too expensive for most people.

Donkeys, which were imported to the district, have become more common and contribute,
in particular, to the transportation of crops and goods to market. Those who have bought
donkeys are mainly from richer households but, with an increased supply through local
breeding, donkeys should become more affordable. Meanwhile, local initiatives are
promoting the renting out of the existing donkeys.

It should be noted, however, that a donkey, which at 20,000 Tanzanian shillings costs less
than a bicycle, is still an investment equal to an average household's income over half a
year This clearly illustrates the need for supplementary measures if one wants to assist the
rural poor

Section E
It would have been easy to criticise the MIRTP for using in the early phases a 'top-down'
approach, in which decisions were made by experts and officials before being handed
down to communities, but it was necessary to start the process from the level of the
governmental authorities of the district. It would have been difficult to respond to the
requests of villagers and other rural inhabitants without the support and understanding of
district authorities.
Section F

Today, nobody in the district argues about the importance of improved paths and
inexpensive means of transport. But this is the result of dedicated work over a long period,
particularly from the officers in charge of community development. They played an
essential role in raising awareness and interest among the rural communities.

The concept of integrated rural transport is now well established in Tanzania, where a
major program of rural transport is just about to start.The experiences from Makete will help
in this initiative, and Makete District will act as a reference for future work.

Questions 1-4

Reading Passage has six sections, A-F.

Choose the correct heading for sections B, C, E and F from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-xi, in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.


List of Headings
i MIRTP as a future model
ii Identifying the main transport problems
iii Preference for motorised vehicles
iv Government authorities’ instructions
v Initial improvements in mobility and transport modes
vi Request for improved transport in Makete
vii Transport improvements in the northern part of the district
viii Improvements in the rail network
ix Effects of initial MI RTP measures
x Co-operation of district officials
xi Role of wheelbarrows and donkeys


Example Answer

Section A vi

1 Section B 1.....................

2 Section C 2.....................
Example Answer

Section D ix

3 Section E 3.....................

4 Section F 4.....................


Questions 5-9

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage?

In boxes 5-9 on your answer sheet, write
YES if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

5..................... MIRTP was divided into five phases.

6..................... Prior to the start of MIRTP the Makete district was almost inaccessible
during the rainy season.
7..................... Phase I of MIRTP consisted of a survey of household expenditure on
transport.
8..................... The survey concluded that one-fifth or 20% of the household transport
requirement as outside the local area.
9..................... MIRTP hoped to improve the movement of goods from Makete district to
the country’s capital.


Questions 10-13

Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-J, below.
Write the correct letter, A-J, in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet.

10 Construction of footbridges, steps and handrails 10.....................

11 Frequent breakdown of buses and trucks in Makete 11.....................

12 The improvement of secondary roads and paths 12.....................

13 The isolation of Makete for part of the year 13.....................

Aprovided the people of Makete with experience in running bus and truck services.

Bwas especially successful in the northern part of the district.
Cdiffered from earlier phases in that the community became less actively involved.

Dimproved paths used for transport up and down hillsides.
Ewas no longer a problem once the roads had been improved.

F cost less than locally made wheelbarrows.
Gwas done only at the request of local people who were willing to lend a hand.

Hwas at first considered by MIRTP to be affordable for the people of the district.
I hindered attempts to make the existing transport services more efficient.

J was thought to be the most important objective of Phase III.

Questions 14

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in box 14 on your answer sheet.

Which of the following phrases best describes the main aim of Reading Passage?

A to suggest that projects such as MIRTP are needed in other countries

B to describe how MIRTP was implemented and how successful it was

C to examine how MIRTP promoted the use of donkeys

D to warn that projects such as MIRTP are likely to have serious problems

Solution:

1. ii 8. YES
2. v 9. NOT GIVEN

3. x 10. D
4. i 11. I

5. NO 12. G
6. YES 13. E

7. NO 14. B
