TITLE: Making Every Drop Count
INDEX: 266
============================================================

Making Every Drop Count

A

The history of human civilisation is entwined with the history of the ways we have learned
to manipulate water resources. As towns gradually expanded, water was brought from
increasingly remote sources, leading to sophisticated engineering efforts such as dams and
aqueducts. At the height of the Roman Empire, nine major systems, with an innovative
layout of pipes and well-built sewers, supplied the occupants of Rome with as much water
per person as is provided in many parts of the industrial world today.

B

During the industrial revolution and population explosion of the 19th and 20th centuries, the
demand for water rose dramatically. Unprecedented construction of tens of thousands of
monumental engineering projects designed to control floods, protect clean water supplies,
and provide water for irrigation and hydropower brought great benefits to hundreds of
millions of people. Food production has kept pace with soaring populations mainly because
of the expansion of artificial irrigation systems that make possible the growth of 40 % of the
world’s food. Nearly one fifth of all the electricity generated worldwide is produced by
turbines spun by the power of falling water.

C

Yet there is a dark side to this picture: despite our progress, half of the world’s population
still suffers, with water services inferior to those available to the ancient Greeks and
Romans. As the United Nations report on access to water reiterated in November 2001,
more than one billion people lack access to clean drinking water; some two and a half
billion do not have adequate sanitation services. Preventable water-related diseases kill an
estimated 10,000 to 20,000 children every day, and the latest evidence suggests that we
are falling behind in efforts to solve these problems.

D

The consequences of our water policies extend beyond jeopardising human health. Tens of
millions of people have been forced to move from their homes - often with little warning or
compensation - to make way for the reservoirs behind dams. More than 20 % of all
freshwater fish species are now threatened or endangered because dams and water
withdrawals have destroyed the free-flowing river ecosystems where they thrive. Certain
irrigation practices degrade soil quality and reduce agricultural productivity. Groundwater
aquifers* are being pumped down faster than they are naturally replenished in parts of
India, China, the USA and elsewhere. And disputes over shared water resources have led
to violence and continue to raise local, national and even international tensions.

*underground stores of water

E
At the outset of the new millennium, however, the way resource planners think about water
is beginning to change. The focus is slowly shifting back to the provision of basic human
and environmental needs as top priority - ensuring ‘some for all,’ instead of ‘more for
some’. Some water experts are now demanding that existing infrastructure be used in
smarter ways rather than building new facilities, which is increasingly considered the option
of last, not first, resort. This shift in philosophy has not been universally accepted, and it
comes with strong opposition from some established water organisations. Nevertheless, it
may be the only way to address successfully the pressing problems of providing everyone
with clean water to drink, adequate water to grow food and a life free from preventable
water-related illness.

F
Fortunately - and unexpectedly - the demand for water is not rising as rapidly as some
predicted. As a result, the pressure to build new water infrastructures has diminished over
the past two decades. Although population, industrial output and economic productivity
have continued to soar in developed nations, the rate at which people withdraw water from
aquifers, rivers and lakes has slowed. And in a few parts of the world, demand has actually
fallen.

G

What explains this remarkable turn of events? Two factors: people have figured out how to
use water more efficiently, and communities are rethinking their priorities for water use.
Throughout the first three-quarters of the 20th century, the quantity of freshwater
consumed per person doubled on average; in the USA, water withdrawals increased
tenfold while the population quadrupled. But since 1980, the amount of water consumed
per person has actually decreased, thanks to a range of new technologies that help to
conserve water in homes and industry. In 1965, for instance, Japan used approximately 13
million gallons* of water to produce $1 million of commercial output; by 1989 this had
dropped to 3.5 million gallons (even accounting for inflation) - almost a quadrupling of water
productivity. In the USA, water withdrawals have fallen by more than 20 % from their peak
in 1980.

H

On the other hand, dams, aqueducts and other kinds of infrastructure will still have to be
built, particularly in developing countries where basic human needs have not been met. But
such projects must be built to higher specifications and with more accountability to local
people and their environment than in the past. And even in regions where new projects
seem warranted, we must find ways to meet demands with fewer resources, respecting
ecological criteria and to a smaller budget.

* 1 gallon: 4.546 litres

Questions 1-7

Reading Passage has seven paragraphs, A-H.

Choose the correct heading for paragraphs A and C-H from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-xi, in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet.


List of Headings
i Scientists’ call for a revision of policy
ii An explanation for reduced water use
iii How a global challenge was met
iv Irrigation systems fall into disuse
v Environmental effects
vi The financial cost of recent technological improvements
vii The relevance to health
viii Addressing the concern over increasing populations
ix A surprising downward trend in demand for water
x The need to raise standards
xi A description of ancient water supplies


14 Paragraph A 1.....................
Example Answer

Paragraph B iii

15 Paragraph C 2.....................

16 Paragraph D 3.....................

17 Paragraph E 4.....................

18 Paragraph F 5.....................
19 Paragraph G 6.....................

20 Paragraph H 7.....................


Questions 8-13
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?

In boxes 8-13 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
8..................... Water use per person is higher in the industrial world than it was in
Ancient Rome.

9..................... Feeding increasing populations is possible due primarily to improved
irrigation systems.

10..................... Modern water systems imitate those of the ancient Greeks and Romans.

11..................... Industrial growth is increasing the overall demand for water.

12..................... Modern technologies have led to a reduction in domestic water
consumption.

13..................... In the future, governments should maintain ownership of water
infrastructures.

Solution:

1. xi 8. NO
2. vii 9. YES

3. v 10. NOT GIVEN
4. i 11. NO

5. ix 12. YES
6. ii 13. NOT GIVEN

7. x
