TITLE: Malaria Combat in Italy
INDEX: 268
============================================================

Malaria Combat in Italy

A

Mal-aria. Bad air. Even the world is Italian, and this horrible disease marked the life of
those in the peninsula for thousands of years. Giuseppe Garibaldi’s wife died of the
disease, as did the country’s first prime minister, Cavour, in 1861. Yet by 1962, Italy was
officially declared malaria-free, and it has remained so ever since. Frank Snowden’s study
of this success story is a remarkable piece of historical work. Original, crystal-clear,
analytical and passionate, Snowden (who has previously written about cholera) takes us to
areas historians have rarely visited before.

B

Everybody now knows that malaria is carried by mosquitoes. Malaria has always been the
subject of research for medical practitioners from time immemorial. However, many ancient
texts, especially medical literature, mention of various aspects of malaria and even of its
possible link with mosquitoes and insects. Early man, confronting the manifestations of
malaria, attributed the fevers to supernatural influences: evil spirits, angered deities, or the
black magic of sorcerers. But in the 19th century, most experts believed that the disease
was not produced by unclean air (“miasma” or “poisoning of the air”). Two Americans,
Josiah Clark Nott and Lewis Daniel Beauperthy, echoed Crawford’s ideas. Nott in his essay
“Yellow Fever Contrasted with Bilious Fever,” published in 1850, dismissed the miasma
theory as worthless, arguing that microscopic insects somehow transmitted by mosquitoes
caused both malaria and yellow fever. Others made a link between swamps, water and
malaria, but did not make the further leap towards insects. The consequences of these
theories were that little was done to combat the disease before the end of the century.
Things became so bad that 11m Italians (from a total population of 25m) were
“permanently at risk”. In malarial zones, the life expectancy of land workers was a terrifying
22.5 years. Those who escaped death were weakened or suffered from splenomegaly – a
“painful enlargement of the spleen” and “a lifeless stare”. The economic impact of the
disease was immense. Epidemics were blamed on southern Italians, given the widespread
belief that malaria was hereditary. In the 1880s, such theories began to collapse as the
dreaded mosquito was identified as the real culprit.

C

Italian scientists, drawing on the pioneering work of French doctor Alphonse Laveran, were
able to predict the cycles of fever but it was in Rome that further key discoveries were
made. Giovanni Battista Grassi, a naturalist, found that a particular type of mosquito was
the carrier of malaria. By experimenting on healthy volunteers (mosquitoes were released
into rooms where they drank the blood of the human guinea pigs), Grassi was able to make
the direct link between the insects (all females of a certain kind) and the disease. Soon,
doctors and scientists made another startling discovery: the mosquitoes themselves were
also infected and not mere carriers. Every year, during the mosquito season, malarial blood
was moved around the population by the insects. Definitive proof of these new theories
was obtained after an extraordinary series of experiments in Italy, where healthy people
were introduced into malarial zones but kept free of mosquito bites – and remained well.
The new Italian state had the necessary information to tackle the disease.
D

A complicated approach was adopted, which made use of quinine – a drug obtained from
tree bark which had long been used to combat fever but was now seen as a crucial part of
the war on malaria. Italy introduced a quinine law and a quinine tax in 1904, and the drug
was administered to large numbers of rural workers. Despite its often terrible side-effects
(the headaches produced were known as the “quinine-buzz”), the drug was successful in
limiting the spread of the disease, and in breaking cycles of infection. In addition, Italy set
up rural health centres and invested heavily in education programmes. Malaria, as
Snowden shows, was not just a medical problem, but a social and regional issue, and
could only be defeated through multi-layered strategies. Politics was itself transformed by
the anti-malarial campaigns.

E

It was originally decided to give quinine to all those in certain regions – even healthy
people; peasants were often suspicious of the medicine being forced upon them. Doctors
were sometimes met with hostility and refusal, and many were dubbed “poisoners”. Despite
these problems, the strategy was hugely successful. Deaths from malaria fell by some 80%
in the first decade of the 20th century and some areas escaped altogether from the
scourge of the disease.

F

Shamefully, the Italian malaria expert Alberto Missiroli had a role to play in the disaster: he
did not distribute quinine, despite being well aware of the epidemic to come. Snowden
claims that Missiroli was already preparing a new strategy – with the support of the US
Rockefeller Foundation – using a new pesticide, DDT. Missiroli allowed the epidemic to
spread, in order to create the ideal conditions for a massive, and lucrative, human
experiment. Fifty-five thousand cases of malaria were recorded in the province of Littoria
alone in 1944. It is estimated that more than a bird of those in the affected area contracted
the disease. Thousands, nobody knows how many, died.

G
With the war over, the US government and the Rockefeller Foundation were free to
experiment. DDT was sprayed from the air and 3m Italians had their bodies covered with
the chemical. The effects were dramatic, and nobody really cared about the toxic effects of
the chemical. By 1962, malaria was more or less gone from the whole peninsula. The last
cases were noted in a poor region of Sicily. One of the final victims to die of the disease in
Italy was the popular cyclist, Fausto Coppi. He had contracted malaria in Africa in 1960,
and the failure of doctors in the north of Italy to spot the disease was a sign of the times. A
few decades earlier, they would have immediately noticed the tell-tale signs; it was later
claimed that a small dose of quinine would have saved his life.

H

As there are still more than 1m deaths every year from malaria worldwide, Snowden’s book
also has contemporary relevance. This is a disease that affects every level of the societies
where it is rampant. As Snowden writes: “In Italy, malaria undermined agricultural
productivity, decimated the army, destroyed communities and left families impoverished.”
The economic miracle of the 50s and 60s which made Italy into a modern industrial nation
would not have been possible without the eradication of malaria. Moreover, this book
convincingly argues that the disease was “an integral part of the big picture of modern
Italian history”. This magnificent study, beautifully written and impeccably documented,
deserves an audience beyond specialists in history, or in Italy. It also provides us with “a
message of hope for a world struggling with the great present-day medical emergency”.

Questions 1-4

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage.

Using NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.

Theories for malaria origin have always been the issue of research for medical practitioners
from ancient time. Although the link between malaria and mosquito was established lately,
it has been recorded in words that 1....................., including mosquito, may play the major
culprits. In the 19th century, most experts rejected the idea of the miasma theory which
related malaria to 2...................... Even another widespread theory arose that southern
Italians were blamed, to whom malaria was 3...................... In southern Italy, the situation
became so severe that near half the Italians population was thought to be “permanently at
risk”. In malarial areas the 4...................... Of rural workers was surprisingly shorter. In the

1880s, such theories began to withdraw as the mosquito was identified as the true cause.


Questions 5-8

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage?

In boxes 5-8 on your answer sheet write

YES if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer
NO if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this


5..................... The volunteers in Grassi experiments were from all parts over Italy.

6..................... Healthy people could remain safe in malaria – infectious zone if they did
not have mosquito bites.

7..................... Quinine is an effective drug which had long been used to combat malaria.

8..................... Eradicating malaria was a goal combined both medical and political
significance.


Questions 9-14

Reading Passage has 8 paragraphs, A-H.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter A-H in boxes 9-14 on your answer sheet.


9..................... A breakthrough was found that mosquito was the carrier of malaria
10..................... A scientist intentionally failed to restrict the epidemic area.

11..................... This successful story still holds true for today’s readers worldwide.

12..................... One of the final cases reported dying of malaria in Italy

13..................... the negative symptoms of the highly effective drug

14..................... A list of the speculative hypothesis was cited.

Solution:

1. insects 8. YES
2. unclean air 9. C

3. hereditary 10. F
4. life expectancy 11. H

5. NOT GIVEN 12. G
6. YES 13. D

7. NO 14. B
