TITLE: Measures to combat infectious disease in tsarist Russia
INDEX: 276
============================================================

Measures to combat infectious disease in tsarist Russia

A In the second half of the seventeenth century, Russian authorities began
implementing controls at the borders of their empire to prevent the importation of
plague, a highly infectious and dangerous disease. Information on disease outbreak
occurring abroad was regularly reported to the tsar’s court through various means,
including commercial channels (travelling merchants), military personnel deployed
abroad, undercover agents, the network of Imperial Foreign Office embassies and
representations abroad, and the customs offices. For instance, the heads of
customs offices were instructed to question foreigners entering Russia about
possible epidemics of dangerous diseases in their respective countries.

B If news of an outbreak came from abroad, relations with the affected country were
suspended. For instance, foreign vessels were not allowed to dock in Russian ports
if there was credible information about the existence of epidemics in countries from
whence they had departed. In addition, all foreigners entering Russia from those
countries had to undergo quarantine. In 1665, after receiving news about a plague
epidemic in England, Tsar Alexei wrote a letter to King Charles II in which he
announced the cessation of Russian trade relations with England and other foreign
states. These protective measures appeared to have been effective, as the country
did not record any cases of plague during that year and in the next three decades. It
was not until 1692 that another plague outbreak was recorded in the Russian
province of Astrakhan. This epidemic continued for five months and killed 10,383
people, or about 65 percent of the city’s population. By the end of the seventeenth
century, preventative measures had been widely introduced in Russia, including the
isolation of persons ill with plague, the imposition of quarantines, and the
distribution of explanatory public health notices about plague outbreaks.

C During the eighteenth century, although none of the occurrences was of the same
scale as in the past, plague appeared in Russia several times. For instance, from
1703 to 1705, a plague outbreak that had ravaged Istanbul spread to the Podolsk and
Kiev provinces in Russia, and then to Poland and Hungary. After defeating the
Swedes in the battle of Poltava in 1709, Tsar Peter I (Peter the Great) dispatched part
of his army to Poland, where plague had been raging for two years. Despite
preventive measures, the disease spread among the Russian troops. In 1710, the
plague reached Riga (then part of Sweden, now the capital of Latvia), where it was
active until 1711 and claimed 60,000 lives. During this period, the Russians besieged
Riga and, after the Swedes had surrendered the city in 1710, the Russian army lost
9.800 soldiers to the plague. Russian military chronicles of the time note that more
soldiers died of the disease after the capture of Riga than from enemy fire during the
siege of that city.

D Tsar Peter I imposed strict measures to prevent the spread of plague during these
conflicts. Soldiers suspected of being infected were isolated and taken to areas far
from military camps. In addition, camps were designed to separate divisions,
detachments, and smaller units of soldiers. When plague reached Narva (located in
present-day Estonia) and threatened to spread to St. Petersburg, the newly built
capital of Russia, Tsar Peter I ordered the army to cordon off the entire boundary
along the Luga River, including temporarily halting all activity on the river.
In order to prevent the movement of people and goods from Narva to St Petersburg and
Novgorod, roadblocks and checkpoints were set up on all roads. The tsar’s orders were
rigorously enforced, and those who disobeyed were hung.

E However, although the Russian authorities applied such methods to contain the
spread of the disease and limit the number of victims, all of the measures had a
provisional character: they were intended to respond to a specific outbreak, and
were not designed as a coherent set of measures to be implemented systematically
at the first sign of plague. The advent of such a standard response system came a
few years later.

F The first attempts to organise procedures and carry out proactive steps to control
plague date to the aftermath of the 1727- 1728 epidemic in Astrakhan. In response to
this, the Russian imperial authorities issued several decrees aimed at controlling the
future spread of plague. Among these decrees, the ‘Instructions for Governors and
Heads of Townships’ required that all governors immediately inform the Senate - a
government body created by Tsar Peter I in 1711 to advise the monarch - if plague
cases were detected in their respective provinces.

Furthermore, the decree required that governors ensure the physical examination of all
persons suspected of carrying the disease and their subsequent isolation. In addition, it
was ordered that sites where plague victims were found had to be encircled by checkpoints
and isolated for the duration of the outbreak. These checkpoints were to remain operational
for at least six weeks.

The houses of infected persons were to be burned along with all of the personal property
they contained, including farm animals and cattle. The governors were instructed to inform
the neighbouring provinces and cities about every plague case occurring on their territories.
Finally, letters brought by couriers were heated above a fire before being copied.

G The implementation by the authorities of these combined measures demonstrates
their intuitive understanding of the importance of the timely isolation of infected
people to limit the spread of plague.

Questions 1-6

Reading Passage 2 has SEVEN sections, A-G.

Choose the correct heading for sections A-F from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-viii.


List of Headings
i Outbreaks of plague as a result of military campaigns.

ii Systematic intelligence-gathering about external cases of plague.
iii Early forms of treatment for plague victims.

iv The general limitations of early Russian anti-plague measures.

v Partly successful bans against foreign states affected by plague.

vi Hostile reactions from foreign states to Russian anti-plague measures.

vii Various measures to limit outbreaks of plague associated with war.

viii The formulation and publication of preventive strategies.

1..................... Section A

2..................... Section B

3..................... Section C

4..................... Section D

5..................... Section E

6..................... Section F


Questions 7-8

Choose TWO letters, A—E.

Write the correct letters.

Which TWO measures did Russia take in the seventeenth century to avoid plague
outbreaks?

A Cooperation with foreign leaders.
B Spying.

C Military campaigns.

D Restrictions on access to its ports.
E Expulsion of foreigners.


Questions 9-10

Choose TWO letters, A-E.

Write the correct letters.

Which TWO statements are made about Russia in the early eighteenth century?

A Plague outbreaks were consistently smaller than before.

B Military casualties at Riga exceeded the number of plague victims.

C The design of military camps allowed plague to spread quickly.
D The tsar’s plan to protect St Petersburg from plague was not strictly implemented.

E Anti-plague measures were generally reactive rather than strategic.


Questions 11-13

Complete the sentences below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

11 An outbreak of plague in 11..................... prompted the publication of a coherent
preventative strategy.

12 Provincial governors were ordered to burn the 12..................... and possessions of
plague victims.

13 Correspondence was held over a 13..................... prior to copying it.

Solution:

8. B OR D IN
1. ii
EITHER ORDER
9. A OR E IN
2. v
EITHER ORDER
10. A OR E IN
3. i
EITHER ORDER
4. vii 11. Astrakhan
5. iv 12. houses
6. viii 13. fire
7. B OR D IN
EITHER ORDER
