TITLE: Migratory Beekeeping
INDEX: 283
============================================================

Migratory Beekeeping


Taking Wing

To eke out a full-time living from their honeybees, about half the nation’s 2,000
commercial beekeepers pull up stakes each spring, migrating north to find more
flowers for their bees. Besides turning floral nectar into honey, these hardworking
insects also pollinate crops for farmers -for a fee. As autumn approaches, the
beekeepers pack up their hives and go south, scrambling for pollination contracts in
hot spots like California’s fertile Central Valley.

Of the 2,000 commercial beekeepers in the United States about half migrate This pays off
in two ways Moving north in the summer and south in the winter lets bees work a longer
blooming season, making more honey — and money — for their keepers. Second,
beekeepers can carry their hives to farmers who need bees to pollinate their crops. Every
spring a migratory beekeeper in California may move up to 160 million bees to flowering
fields in Minnesota and every winter his family may haul the hives back to California, where
farmers will rent the bees to pollinate almond and cherry trees.

Migratory beekeeping is nothing new. The ancient Egyptians moved clay hives, probably
on rafts, down the Nile to follow the bloom and nectar flow as it moved toward Cairo. In the
1880s North American beekeepers experimented with the same idea, moving bees on
barges along the Mississippi and on waterways in Florida, but their lighter, wooden hives
kept falling into the water. Other keepers tried the railroad and horse- drawn wagons, but
that didn’t prove practical. Not until the 1920s when cars and trucks became affordable and
roads improved, did migratory beekeeping begin to catch on.

For the Californian beekeeper, the pollination season begins in February. At this time, the
beehives are in particular demand by farmers who have almond groves; they need two
hives an acre. For the three-week long bloom, beekeepers can hire out their hives for $32
each. It’s a bonanza for the bees too. Most people consider almond honey too bitter to eat
so the bees get to keep it for themselves.
By early March it is time to move the bees. It can take up to seven nights to pack the 4,000
or so hives that a beekeeper may own. These are not moved in the middle of the day
because too many of the bees would end up homeless. But at night, the hives are stacked
onto wooden pallets, back-to-back in sets of four, and lifted onto a truck. It is not necessary
to wear gloves or a beekeeper’s veil because the hives are not being opened and the bees
should remain relatively quiet. Just in case some are still lively, bees can be pacified with a
few puffs of smoke blown into each hive’s narrow entrance.

In their new location, the beekeeper will pay the farmer to allow his bees to feed in such
places as orange groves. The honey produced here is fragrant and sweet and can be sold
by the beekeepers. To encourage the bees to produce as much honey as possible during
this period, the beekeepers open the hives and stack extra boxes called supers on top.
These temporary hive extensions contain frames of empty comb for the bees to fill with
honey. In the brood chamber below, the bees will stash honey to eat later. To prevent the
queen from crawling up to the top and laying eggs, a screen can be inserted between the
brood chamber and the supers. Three weeks later the honey can be gathered.

Foul smelling chemicals are often used to irritate the bees and drive them down into the
hive’s bottom boxes, leaving the honey- filled supers more or less bee free. These can then
be pulled off the hive. They are heavy with honey and may weigh up to 90 pounds each.
The supers are taken to a warehouse. In the extracting room, the frames are lilted out and
lowered into an “uncapper” where rotating blades shave away the wax that covers each
cell. The uncapped frames are put in a carousel that sits on the bottom of a large stainless
steel drum. The carousel is filled to capacity with 72 frames. A switch is flipped and the
frames begin to whirl at 300 revolutions per minute; centrifugal force throws the honey out
of the combs. Finally the honey is poured into barrels for shipment.

After this, approximately a quarter of the hives weakened by disease, mites, or an ageing
or dead queen, will have to be replaced. To create new colonies, a healthy double hive,
teeming with bees, can be separated into two boxes. One half will hold the queen and a
young, already mated queen can be put in the other half, to make two hives from one. By
the time the flowers bloom, the new queens will be laying eggs, filling each hive with young
worker bees. The beekeeper’s family will then migrate with them to their summer location.

Adapted from “America's Beekeepers: Hives for Hire” by Alan Mairson, National
Geographic.

Questions 1-7

The flow chart below outlines the movements of the migratory beekeeper as described in
Reading Passage.

Complete the flow chart.
Choose your answers from the box at the right of the page and write your answers in boxes
1-7 on your answer sheet.


BEEKEEPER MOVEMENTS

Example

In February, Californian farmers hire bees to help Answer: polinate almond
trees.


In March, beekeepers 1..................... for migration at night when the hives are List of Words/Phrases
2..................... and the bees are generally tranquil. A little 3..................... can
smoke chemicals pay
ensure that this is the case.
barrels protection charge
They transport their hives to orange groves where farmers 4..................... set off light split
beekeepers for placing them on their land. Here the bees make honey.
pollinate machines supers
combs screen prepare
After three weeks, the supers can be taken to a warehouse where 5.....................
are used to remove the wax and extract the honey from the 6...................... full empty queens


After the honey collection, the old hives are rejected. Good double hives are
7..................... and re-queened and the beekeeper transports them to their
summer base.


Questions 8-11

Label the diagram below.

Choose ONE OR TWO WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 8-11 on your answer sheet.


A BEEHIVE
8.....................

9.....................

10.....................

11.....................


Questions 12-15

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage? In
boxes 12-15 write.

YES if the statement agrees with the information given

NO if the statement contradicts the information given

NOT GIVEN if there is no information about this


12..................... The Egyptians keep bees on the banks of the Nile.

13..................... First attempts at migratory beekeeping in America were unsuccessful.

14..................... Bees keep honey for themselves in the bottom of the hive.
15..................... The honey is spun to make it liquid.

Solution:

9. frames (of
1. prepare
comb)
2. full 10. screen
11. brood
3. smoke
chamber
4. charge 12. NOT GIVEN
5. machines 13. YES

6. combs 14. YES
7. split 15. NO

8. (hexagonal)
cells//comb
