TITLE: Motivating Drives
INDEX: 287
============================================================

Motivating Drives

Scientists have been researching the way to get employees motivated for many years. This
research in a relational study which builds the fundamental and comprehensive model for
study. This is especially true when the business goal is to turn unmotivated teams into
productive ones. But their researchers have limitations. It is like studying the movements of
car without taking out the engine.

Motivation is what drives people to succeed and plays a vital role in enhancing an
organizational development. It is important to study the motivation of employees because it
is related to the emotion and behavior of employees. Recent studies show there are four
drives for motivation. They are the drive to acquire, the drive to bond, the drive to
comprehend and the drive to defend.

The Drive to Acquire
The drive to acquire must be met to optimize the acquire aspect as well as the
achievement element. Thus the way that outstanding performance is recognized, the type
of perks that is provided to polish the career path. But sometimes a written letter of
appreciation generates more motivation than a thousand dollar check, which can serve as
the invisible power to boost business engagement. Successful organizations and leaders
not only need to focus on the optimization of physical reward but also on moving other
levers within the organization that can drive motivation.

The Drive to Bond

The drive to bond is also key to driving motivation. There are many kinds of bonds between
people, like friendship, family. In company, employees also want to be an essential part of
company. They want to belong to the company. Employees will be motivated if they find
personal belonging to the company. In the meantime, the most commitment will be
achieved by the employee on condition that the force of motivation within the employee
affects the direction, intensity and persistence of decision and behavior in company.

The Drive to Comprehend

The drive to comprehend motivates many employees to higher performance. For years, it
has been known that setting stretch goals can greatly impact performance. Organizations
need to ensure that the various job roles provide employees with simulation that challenges
them or allow them to grow. Employees don’t want to do meaningless things or
monotonous job. If the job didn’t provide them with personal meaning and fulfillment, they
will leave the company.

The Drive to Defend
The drive to defend is often the hardest lever to pull. This drive manifests itself as a quest
to create and promote justice, fairness, and the ability to express ourselves freely. The
organizational lever for this basic human motivator is resource allocation. This drive is also
met through an employee feeling connection to a company. If their companies are merged
with another, they will show worries.

Two studies have been done to find the relations between the four drives and motivation.
The article based on two studies was finally published in Harvard Business Review. Most
authors’ arguments have laid emphasis on four-drive theory and actual investigations.
Using the results of the surveys which executed with employees from Fortune 500
companies and other two global businesses (P company and H company), the article
mentions about how independent drives influence employees’ behavior and how
organizational levers boost employee motivation.
The studies show that the drive to bond is most related to fulfilling commitment, while the
drive to comprehend is most related to how much effort employees spend on works. The
drive to acquire can be satisfied by a rewarding system which ties rewards to
performances, and gives the best people opportunities for advancement. For drive to
defend, a study on the merging of P company and H company shows that employees in
former company show an unusual cooperating attitude.

The key to successfully motivate employees is to meet all drives. Each of these drives is
important if we are to understand employee motivation. These four drives, while not
necessarily the only human drives, are the ones that are central to unified understanding of
modern human life.

Questions 1-5

Choose the correct letter A, B, C or D

Write the correct letter in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.

1. According to the passage, what are we told about the study of motivation?

A The theory of motivating employees is starting to catch attention in organizations in
recent years.

B It is very important for managers to know how to motivate their subordinates
because it is related to the salary of employees.

C Researchers have tended to be too theoretical to their study.

D The goal of employee motivation is to increase the profit of organizations.
2. What can be inferred from the passage about the study of people’s drives?

A Satisfying employees’ drives can positively lead to the change of behavior.

B Satisfying employees’ drives will negatively affect their emotions.

C Satisfying employees’ drives can increase companies’ productions.

D Satisfying employees’ drives will result in employees’ outstanding performance.

3. According to paragraph three, in order to optimize employees’ performance, are
needed.

A Drive to acquire and achievement element

B Outstanding performance and recognition

C Career fulfillment and a thousand dollar check
D Financial incentive and recognition

4. According to paragraph five, how does “the drive to comprehend” help employees
perform better?

A It can help employees better understand the development of their organizations.

B It can help employees feel their task in meaningful to their companies.

C It can help employees set higher goals.

D It can provide employees with repetitive tasks.

5. According to paragraph six, which of following is true about “drive to defend”?

A Organizational resource is the most difficult to allocate.
B It is more difficult to implement than the drive to comprehend.

C Employees think it is very important to voice their own opinions.
D Employees think it is very important to connect with a merged corporation.


Questions 6-8

Choose THREE letters, A-F.

Write the correct letters in boxes 6-8 on your answer sheet.

Which THREE of the following statements are true of study of drives?

A Employees will be motivated if they feel belonged to the company.

B If employees get an opportunity of training and development program, their motivation
will be enhanced.

C If employees’ working goals are complied with organizational objectives, their motivation
will be reinforced.

D If employees’ motivation in very low, companies should find a way to increase their
salary as their first priority.

E If employees find their work lacking challenging, they will leave the company.

F Employees will worry if their company is sold.


Questions 9-14

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage?

In boxes 35-40 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement agree with the claims of the writer
NO if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

9..................... Increasing pay can lead to the high work motivation.

10..................... Local companies benefit more from global companies through the
study.

11..................... Employees achieve the most commitment if their drive to
comprehend is met.

12..................... The employees in former company presented unusual attitude toward
the merging of two companies.

13..................... The two studies are done to analyze the relationship between the
natural drives and the attitude of employees.

14..................... Rewarding system cause the company to lose profit.

Solution:

8. A, E, F IN ANY
1. C
ORDER
2. A 9. NO
3. D 10. NOT GIVEN
4. B 11. NO

5. C 12. YES

6. A, E, F IN ANY
13. NO
ORDER
7. A, E, F IN ANY
14. NOT GIVEN
ORDER
