TITLE: Multitasks
INDEX: 292
============================================================

Multitasks

A

Do you read while listening to music? Do you like to watch TV while finishing your
homework? People who have these kinds of habits are called multi-taskers.

Multitasks are able to complete two tasks at the same time by dividing their focus.
However, Thomas Lehman, a researcher in Psychology, believes people never really do
multiple things simultaneously. Maybe a person is reading while listening to music, but in
reality, the brain can only focus on one task. Reading thewords in a book will cause you to
ignore some of the words of the music. When people think they are accomplishing two
different tasks efficiently, what they are really doing is dividing their focus. While listening to
music, people become less able to focus on their surroundings. For example, we all have
experience of times when we talk with friends and they are not responding properly. Maybe
they are listening to someone else talk, or maybe they are reading a text on their smart
phone and don't hear what you are saying. Lehman called this phenomenon “email voice"

B
the world has been changed by computers and its spin offs like smart-phones or
cellphones. Now that most individuals have a personal device, like a smart-phoneor a
laptop, they are frequently reading, watching or listening to virtual information. This raises
the occurrence of multitasking in our day to day life. Nowwhen you work, you work with
your typewriter, your cellphone, and some colleagues who may drop by at any time to
speak with you. In professional meetings, when one normally focuses and listens to one
another, people are more likely to have a cell phone in their lap, reading or communicating
silently with more people than ever, liven inventions such as the cordless phone has
increased multitasking. In the old days, a traditional wall phone would ring, and then the
housewife would have to stop her activities to answer it. When it rang, the housewife will sit
down with her legs up. and chat, with no laundry or sweeping or answering the door. In the
modern era, our technology is convenient enough to not interrupt our daily tasks.

C
Earl Miller, an expert at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, studied the prefrontal
cortex, which controls the brain while a person is multitasking. According to his studies, the
size of this cortex varies between species, He found that for humans, the size of this part
constitutes one third of the brain, while it is only 4 to 5 percent in dogs, and about 15% in
monkeys. Given that this cortex is larger on a human, it allows a human to be more flexible
and accurate in his or her multitasking.. However, Miller wanted to look further into whether
the cortexwas truly processing information about two different tasks simultaneously. He
designed an experiment where he presents visual stimulants to his subjects in a wax that
mimics multi-tasking. Miller then attached sensors tothe patients " heads to pick up the
electric patterns of the brain. This sensor would show if" the brain particles, called neurons,
were truly processing two different tasks. What he found is that the brain neurons only lit up
in singular areas one at a time, and never simultaneously.

D
Davis Meyer, a professor of University of Michigan, studied the young adults in a similar
experiment. He instructed them to simultaneously do math problems and classify simple
words into different categories. For this experiment. Meyer found that when you think you
are doing several jobs at the same time, you are actuallyswitching between jobs. Even
though the people tried to do the tasks at the sametime, and both tasks were eventually
accomplished, overall, the task look more time than if the person focused on a single task
one at a time.
E

People sacrifice efficiency when multitasking, Gloria Mark set office workers as his
subjects. He found that they were constantly multitasking. He observed that nearly every

11 minutes people at work were disrupted. He found that doing different jobs at the same
time may actually save time. However, despite the fact that they are faster, it does not
mean they are more efficient. And we are equally likely to self-interrupt as be interrupted by
outside sources. He found that in office nearly every 12 minutes an employee would stop
and with no reason at all,cheek a website on their computer, call someone or write an
email. If they concentrated for more than 20 minutes, they would feel distressed. He
suggestedthat the average person may suffer from a short concentration span. This short
attention span might be natural, but others suggest that new technology may be the
problem. With cellphones and computers at our sides at all times, people will never run out
of distractions. The format of media, such as advertisements, music, news articles and TV
shows are also shortening, so people are used to paying attention to information for a very
short time

F
So even though focusing on one single task is the most efficient way for our brainsto work,
it is not practical to use this method in real life. According to human nature, people feel
more comfortable and efficient in environments with a varietyof tasks, Edward Hallowell
said that people are losing a lot of efficiency in the workplace due to multitasking, outside
distractions and self-distractions. As it matter of fact, the changes made to the workplace
do not have to be dramatic.

No one is suggesting we ban e-mail or make employees focus on only one task. However,
certain common workplace tasks, such as group meetings, would be more efficient if we
banned cell-phones, a common distraction. A person can alsoapply these tips to prevent
self-distraction. Instead of arriving to your office and checking all of your e-mails for new
tasks, a common workplace ritual, a person could dedicate an hour to a single task first
thing in the morning. Self-timing is a great way to reduce distraction and efficiently finish
tasks one by one, instead of slowing ourselves down with multi-tasking.

Questions 1-5

Reading Passage 2 has six paragraphs, A-F.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter, A-F, in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet

1..................... a reference to a domestic situation that does not require multitasking

2..................... a possible explanation of why we always do multitask together
3..................... a practical solution to multitask in work environment

4..................... relating multitasking to the size of prefrontal cortex

5..................... longer time spent doing two tasks at the same time than one at a time


Questions 6-10

Look at the following statements (Questions 6-10) and the list of scientists below.

Match each statement with the correct scientist, A-E.

Write the correct letter, A-E, in boxes 6-10 on your answer sheet. NB

You may use any letter more than once.

List of Scientists

A Thomas Lehman

B Earl Miller
c David Meyer
D Gloria Mark

E Edward Hallowell

6..................... When faced multiple visual stimulants, one can only concentrate on one of
them.
7..................... Doing two things together may be faster but not better.
8..................... People never really do two things together even if you think you do.

9..................... The causes of multitask lie in the environment.
10..................... Even minor changes in the workplace will improve work efficiency


Questions 11-13

Complete the sentences below.

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer. Write your
answers in boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet.
A term used to refer to a situation when you are reading a text and cannot focuson your
surroundings is 11......................

The 12..................... part of the brain controls multitasking.

The practical solution of multitask in work is not to allow use of cellphone in
13......................

Solution:

1. B 8. A
2. E 9. E

3. F 10. E
4. C 11. email voice

5. D 12. prefrontal cortex
6. B 13. group meetings

7. D
