TITLE: Mystery in Easter Island
INDEX: 298
============================================================

Mystery in Easter Island

A

One of the world’s most famous yet least visited archaeological sites, Easter Island is a
small, hilly, now treeless island of volcanic origin. Located in the Pacific Ocean at 27
degrees south of the equator and some 2200 miles (3600 kilometers) off the coast of Chile,
it is considered to be the world’s most remote inhabited island. The island is, technically
speaking, a single massive volcano rising over ten thousand feet from the Pacific Ocean
floor. The island received its most well-known current name, Easter Island, from the Dutch
sea captain Jacob Roggeveen who became the first European to visit Easter Sunday, April

5, 1722.
B

In the early 1950s, the Norwegian explorer Thor Heyerdahl popularized the idea that the
island had been originally settled by advanced societies of Indians from the coast of South

America. Extensive archaeological, ethnographic and linguistic research has conclusively
shown this hypothesis to be inaccurate. It is now recognized that the original inhabitants of
Easter Island are of Polynesian stock (DNA extracts from skeletons have confirmed this),
that they most probably came from the Marquesas or Society islands, and that they arrived
as early as 318 AD (carbon dating of reeds from a grave confirms this). At the time of their
arrival, much of the island was forested, was teeming with land birds, and was perhaps the
most productive breeding site for seabirds in the Polynesia region. Because of the plentiful
bird, fish and plant food sources, the human population grew and gave rise to a rich
religious and artistic culture.

C

That culture’s most famous features are its enormous stone statues called moai, at least
288 of which once stood upon massive stone platforms called ahu. There are some 250 of
these ahu platforms spaced approximately one-half mile apart and creating an almost
unbroken line around the perimeter of the island. Another 600 moai statues, in various
stages of completion, are scattered around the island, either in quarries or along ancient
roads between the quarries and the coastal areas where the statues were most often
erected. Nearly all the moai are carved from the tough stone of the Rano Raraku volcano.
The average statue is 14 feet and 6 inches tall and weighs 14 tons. Some moai were as
large as 33 feet and weighed more than 80 tons. Depending upon the size of the statues, it
has been estimated that between 50 and 150 people were needed to drag them across the
countryside on sledges and rollers made from the island’s trees.

D

Scholars are unable to definitively explain the function and use of the moai statues. It is
assumed that their carving and erection derived from an idea rooted in similar practices
found elsewhere in Polynesia but which evolved in a unique way on Easter Island.
Archaeological and iconographic analysis indicates that the statue cult was based on an
ideology of male, lineage-based authority incorporating anthropomorphic symbolism. The
statues were thus symbols of authority and power, both religious and political. But they
were not only symbols. To the people who erected and used them, they were actual
repositories of sacred spirit. Carved stone and wooden objects in ancient Polynesian
religions, when properly fashioned and ritually prepared, were believed to be charged by a
magical spiritual essence called mana. The ahu platforms of Easter Island were the
sanctuaries of the people, and the moai statues were the ritually charged sacred objects of
those sanctuaries.

E

Besides its more well-known name, Easter Island is also known as Te-Pito-O-Te-Henuab,
meaning ‘The Navel of the World’, and as Mata-Ki-Te-Rani, meaning ‘Eyes Looking at
Heaven’. These ancient name and a host of mythological details ignored by mainstream
archaeologists point to the possibility that the remote island may once have been a
geodetic marker and the site of an astronomical observatory of a long-forgotten civilization.
In his book, Heaven’s Mirror, Graham Hancock suggests that Easter Island may once have
been a significant scientific outpost of this antediluvian civilization and that its location had
extreme importance in a planet-spanning, mathematically precise grid of sacred sites. Two
other alternative scholars, Christopher Knight and Robert Lomas, have extensively studied
the location and possible function of these geodetic markers. In their fascinating book,
Uriel’s Machine, they suggest that one purpose of the geodetic markers was as part of a
global network of sophisticated astronomical observatories dedicated to predicting and
preparing for future commentary impacts and crystal displacement cataclysms.

F

In the latter years of the 20th century and the first years of the 21st century, various writers
and scientists have advanced theories regarding the rapid decline of Easter Island’s
magnificent civilization around the time of the first European contact. Principal among these
theories, and now shown to be inaccurate, is that postulated by Jared Diamond in his
book Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Survive. Basically, these theories state
that a few centuries after Easter Island’s initial colonization the resource needs of the
growing population had begun to outpace the island’s capacity to renew itself ecologically.
By the 1400s the forests had been entirely cut, the rich ground cover had eroded away, the
springs had dried up, and the vast flocks of birds coming to roost on the island had
disappeared. With no logs to build canoes for offshore fishing, with depleted bird and
wildlife food sources, and with declining crop yields because of the erosion of good soil, the
nutritional intake of the people plummeted. First famine, then cannibalism, set in. Because
the island could no longer feed the chiefs, bureaucrats and priests who kept the complex
society running, the resulting chaos triggered a social and cultural collapse. By 1700 the
population dropped to between one-quarter and one-tenth of its former number, and many
of the statues were toppled during supposed “clan wars” of the 1600 and 1700s.

G

The faulty notions presented in these theories began with the racist assumptions of Thor
Heyerdahl and have been perpetuated by writers, such as Jared Diamond, who do not
have sufficient archaeological and historical understanding of the actual events which
occurred on Easter Island. The real truth regarding the tremendous social devastation
which occurred on Easter Island is that it was a direct consequence of the inhumane
behavior of many of the first European visitors, particularly the slavers who raped and
murdered the islanders, introduced smallpox and other diseases, and brutally removed the
natives to mainland South America.

Questions 1-4

The reading passage has seven paragraphs, A-G

Choose the correct heading for paragraphs A-G from the list below.

Write the correct number, i-xi, in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.

NB There are more headings than paragraphs

List of headings
i The famous moai
ii The status represented symbols of combined purposes
iii The ancient spots which indicate the scientific application
iv The story of the name
v Early immigrants, rise and prosperity
vi The geology of Easter Island
vii The begin of Thor Heyerdahl’s discovery
viii The countering explanation to the misconceptions politically manipulated
ix Symbols of authority and power
x The Navel of the World
xi The Norwegian Invaders’ legacy


Example: Paragraph A iv

1..................... Paragraph B

Example: Paragraph C i

2..................... Paragraph D
3..................... Paragraph E

4..................... Paragraph G


Questions 5-10

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?
In boxes 5-10 on your answer sheet write

TRUE if the statement is true

FALSE if the statement is false
NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage

5..................... The first inhabitants of Easter Island are Polynesian, from the Marquesas
or Society islands.

6..................... Construction of some moai statues on the island was not finished.

7..................... The Moai can be found not only on Easter Island but also elsewhere in
Polynesia.

8..................... Most archaeologists recognised the religious and astronomical functions
for an ancient society.

9..................... The structures of Easter Island work as an astronomical outpost for
extraterrestrial visitors.

10..................... the theory that depleted natural resources leading to the fail of Easter
Island actual have a distorted perspective


Questions 11-14

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage

Using NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 11-14 on your answer sheet.

Many theories speculated that Easter Island’s fall around the era of the initial European
contact. Some say the resources are depleted by a 11.....................; The erroneous
theories began with a root of the 12..................... advanced by some scholars. Early writers
did not have adequate 13..................... understandings to comprehend the true nature of
events on the island. The social devastation was, in fact, a direct result
of 14..................... of the first European settlers.

Solution:

1. v 8. FALSE
2. ii 9. NOT GIVEN

3. iii 10. TRUE
4. viii 11. growing population

5. NOT GIVEN 12. racist assumption
13. archeological and
6. TRUE
historical
7. FALSE 14. inhuman behavior
