TITLE: New Agriculture in Oregon, US
INDEX: 306
============================================================

New Agriculture in Oregon, US

A

Onion growers in eastern Oregon are adopting a system that saves water and keeps
topsoil in place while producing the highest quality “super-colossal” onions. Pear growers in
southern Oregon have reduced their use of some of the most toxic pesticides by up to two-
thirds, and are still producing top-quality pear. Range managers throughout the state have
controlled the poisonous weed tansy ragwort with insect predators and saved the Oregon
livestock industry up to $4.8 million a year.

B

These are some of the results Oregon growers have achieved in collaboration with Oregon
State University (OSU) researchers as they test new farming methods including integrated
pest management (IPM). Nationwide, however, IPM has not delivered results comparable
to those in Oregon. A recent U.S General Accounting Office (GAO) report indicates that
while integrated pest management can result in dramatically reduced pesticide use, the
federal government has been lacking in effectively promoting that goal and implementing
IPM. Farmers also blame the government for not making the new options of pest
management attractive. “Wholesale changes in the way that farmers control the pests on
their farms is an expensive business.” Tony Brown, of the National Farmers Association,
says. “If the farmers are given tax breaks to offset the expenditure, then they would willingly
accept the new practices.” The report goes on to note that even though the use of the
riskiest pesticides has declined nationwide, they still make up more than 40 percent of all
pesticides used today; and national pesticide use has risen by 40 million kilograms since

1992. “Our food supply remains the safest and highest quality on Earth but we continue to
overdose our farmland with powerful and toxic pesticides and to under-use the safe and
effective alternatives,” charged Patrick Leahy, who commissioned the report. Green action
groups disagree about the safety issue. “There is no way that habitual consumption of
foodstuffs grown using toxic chemical of the nature found on today’s farms can be healthy
for consumers,” noted Bill Bowler, spokesman for Green Action, one of many lobbyists
interested in this issue.

C

The GAO report singles out Oregon’s apple and pear producers who have used the new
IPM techniques with growing success. Although Oregon is clearly ahead of the nation,
scientists at OSU are taking the Government Accounting Office criticisms seriously. “We
must continue to develop effective alternative practices that will reduce environmental
hazards and produce high-quality products,” said Paul Jepson, a professor of entomology
at OSU and new director of

D

OSU’s Integrated Plant Protection Centre (IPPC). The IPPC brings together scientists from
OSU’s Agricultural Experiment Station, OSU Extension service, the U.S. Department of
Agriculture and Oregon farmers to help develop agricultural systems that will save water
and soil, and reduce pesticides. In response to the GAO report, the Centre is putting even
more emphasis on integrating research and farming practices to improve Oregon
agriculture environmentally and economically.

E

“The GAO report criticizes agencies for not clearly communicating the goals of IPM,” said
Jepson. “Our challenge is to greatly improve the communication to and from growers, to
learn what works and what doesn’t. the work coming from OSU researchers must be
adopted in the field and not simply languish in scientific journals.”

F

In Oregon, growers and scientists are working together to instigate new practices. For
example, a few years ago scientists at OSU’s Malheur Experiment Station began testing a
new drip irrigation system to replace old ditches that wasted water and washed soil and
fertilizer into streams. The new system cut water and fertilizer use by half kept topsoil in
place and protected water quality.

G

In addition, the new system produced crops of very large onions, rated “super-colossal”
and highly valued by the restaurant industry and food processors. Art Pimms, one of the
researchers at Malheur comments: “Growers are finding that when they adopt more
environmentally benign practices, they can have excellent results. The new practices
benefit the environment and give the growers their success.”

H

OSU researcher in Malheur next tested straw mulch and found that it successfully held soil
in place and kept the ground moist with less irrigation. In addition, and unexpectedly, the
scientists found that the mulched soil created a home for beneficial beetles and spiders that
prey on onion thrips – a notorious pest in commercial onion fields – a discovery that could
reduce the need for pesticides. “I would never have believed that we could replace the
artificial pest controls that we had before and still keep our good results,” commented Steve
Black, a commercial onion farmer in Oregon, “but instead we have actually surpassed
expectations.”

I

OSU researchers throughout the state have been working to reduce dependence on broad-
spectrum chemical spays that are toxic to many kinds of organisms, including humans.
“Consumers are rightly putting more and more pressure on the industry to change its
reliance on chemical pesticides, but they still want a picture-perfect product,” said Rick
Hilton, an entomologist at OSU’s Southern Oregon Research and Extension Centre, where
researches help pear growers reduce the need for highly toxic pesticides. Picture perfect
pears are an important product in Oregon and traditionally they have required lots of
chemicals. In recent years, the industry has faced stiff competition from overseas
producers, so any new methods that growers adopt must make sense economically as well
as environmentally. Hilton is testing a growth regulator that interferes with the molting of
codling moth larvae. Another study used pheromone dispensers to disrupt codling moth
mating. These and other methods of integrated pest management have allowed pear
growers to reduce their use of organophosphates by two-thirds and reduce all other
synthetic pesticides by even more and still produce top-quality pears. These and other
studies around the state are part of the effort of the IPPC to find alternative farming
practices that benefit both the economy and the environment.

Questions 1-8

Use the information in the passage to match the people (listed A-G) with opinions or deeds
below.

Write the appropriate letters A-G in boxes 1-8 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once

A Tony Brown E Art Pimms
B Patrick Leahy F Steve Black
C Bill Bowler G Rick Hilton
D Paul Jepson


1..................... There is a double-advantage to the new techniques.


2..................... The work on developing these alternative techniques is not finished.


3..................... Eating food that has had chemicals used in its production is dangerous to
our health.

4..................... Changing current farming methods into a new one is not a cheap process.

5..................... Results have exceeded the anticipated goal.

6..................... The research done should be translated into practical projects.

7..................... The U.S. produces the best food in the world nowadays.

8..................... Expectations of end-users of agricultural products affect the products.


Questions 9-13

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?
In boxes 9-13 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement is true

NO if the statement is false

NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage


9..................... Integrated Pest Management has generally been regarded as a success
in across the US.
10..................... Oregon farmers of apples and pears have been promoted as successful
examples of Integrated Pest Management.

11..................... The IPPC uses scientists from different organisations globally
12..................... Straw mulch experiments produced unplanned benefits.

13..................... The apple industry is now facing a lot of competition from abroad.

Solution:

1. A 8. G
2. D 9. NO

3. C 10. YES
4. A 11. NO

5. F 12. YES
6. D 13. NOT GIVEN

7. B
