TITLE: NEW RULES FOR THE PAPER GAME
INDEX: 308
============================================================

NEW RULES FOR THE PAPER GAME

1. Computerized data storage and electronic mail were to have heralded the paperless
office. But, contrary to expectation, paper consumption throughout the world shows no sign
of abating. In fact, consumption, especially of printing and writing papers, continues to
increase. World demand for paper and board is now expected to grow faster than the
general economic growth in the next 15 years. Strong demand will be underprinted by the
growing industrialization of South East Asia, the reemergence of paper packaging, greater
use of facsimile machines and photocopiers, and the popularity of direct -mail advertising. It
is possible that by 2007, world paper and board demand will reach 455 million tonnes,
compared with 241 million tonnes in 1991.

2. The pulp and paper industry has not been badly affected by the electronic technologies
that promised a paperless society. But what has radically altered the industry’s structure is
pressure from another front-a more environmentally conscious society driving an
irreversible move towards cleaner industrial production. The environmental consequences
of antiquated pulp mill practices and technologies had marked this industry as one in need
of reform. Graphic descriptions of deformed fish and thinning populations, particularly in the
Baltic Sea where old pulp mills had discharged untreated effluents for 100 years, have
disturbed the international community.

3. Until the 1950s, it was common for pulp mills and other industries to discharge
untreated effluent into rivers and seas. The environmental effects were at the time either
not understood, or regarded as an acceptable cost of economic prosperity in an
increasingly import-oriented world economy. But greater environmental awareness has
spurred a fundamental change in attitude in the community, in government and in industry
itself.

4. Since the early 1980s, most of the world-scale pulp mills in Scandinavia and North
America have modernized their operations, outlying substantial amounts to improve
production methods. Changes in mill design and processes have been aimed at minimizing
the environmental effects of effluent discharge while at the same time producing pulp with
the whiteness and strength demanded by the international market. The environmental
impetus is taking this industry even further, with the focus now on developing processes
that may even eliminate waste-water discharges. But the ghost of the old mills continues to
haunt industry today. In Europe, companies face a flood of environment-related legislation.

In Germany, companies are now being held responsible for the waste they create.
5. Pulp is the porridge -like mass of plant fibers from which paper is made. Paper makers
choose the type of plant fibre and the processing methods, depending on what the end
product will be used for: whether it is a sturdy packing box, a smooth sheet of writing paper
or a fragile tissue. In wood, which is the source of about 90% of the world’s paper
production, fibres are bound together by lignin, which gives the unbleached pulp a brown
colour. Pulping can be done by mechanical grinding, or by chemical treatment in which
woodchips are “cooked” with chemicals, or by a combination of both methods.

6. Kraft pulping is the most widely used chemical process for producing pulp with the
strength required by the high-quality paper market. It is now usually carried out in a
continuous process in a large vessel called digester. Woodchips are fed from a pile into the
top of the digester. In the digester, the chips are cooked in a solution called white liquor,
nosed of caustic soda (sodium hydroxide) sodium sulphide. The chips are cooked at high
temperatures of up to 170 degree for up to three hours. The pulp is then washed and rate
from the spent cooking liquor which has turned dark and is now appropriately ailed black
liquor. An important feature of kraft pulping is a chemical recovery system which recycles
about 95 % of the cooking chemicals and produces more than enough energy runs the mill.

In a series of steps involving a furnace and tanks, some of the black liquor is transformed
into energy, while some is regenerated into the original white cooking liquor. The pulp that
comes out has little lignin left in the fibres. Bleaching removes the last remaining lignin and
brightens the pulp. Most modern mills have modified their pulping process to remove as
much of the lignin as possible before the pulp moves to the bleaching stage.

Questions 1-4

Look at the following list of factors A-C, which will influence the amount of paper being
used in the future.

Choose FOUR factors which are mentioned in Paragraph 1 of the Reading Passage 3.

Write the correct answers A-C in boxes 1-4 on your Answer Sheet


List of factors

A more people read newspapers
B increased use of paper bags

C increased boob production for education

D wider use of sign post advertising

E increased use of fax machines

F wider use of leaflet advertising

G greater use of duplicating machines


Questions 5-7

Complete the statements from the Paragraph 2,3 and 4 by using NO MORE THAN THREE
WORDS

Write your answers in the boxes 5-7 on your Answer Sheet.

5 The international community has begun to demand5.....................

6 In the past, the environmental effects of pulp mill practices were probably a price to pay
for 6.....................

7 Some paper mills have recently modernized their mill design in order to decrease
7.....................


Questions 8-12

Below is the list of steps in the bra ft process of turning wood chips into paper, which are
numbered 1-8. Only FIVE of the steps listed below are mentioned in the Reading Passage
3. Decide which steps are mentioned and write the appropriate number for each step in the
correct order in the boxes 8-12 on your answer sheet.

1 the chips are cooked

2 the fibres are bound by lignin

3 the pulp is bleached
4 woodchips are put into a pile

5 the pulp is dried

6 the pulp is removed from the black liquor

7 the chips are put into the white liquor

8 the pulp is washed

Solution:

1. B, E, F, G IN
7. environmental effects
ANY ORDER
2. B, E, F, G IN
8. 4
ANY ORDER
3. B, E, F, G IN
9. 7
ANY ORDER
4. B, E, F, G IN
10. 1
ANY ORDER
5. cleaner
industrial 11. 8
production
6. economic
12. 6
prosperity
