TITLE: Numeracy: can animals tell numbers? (Can animals
INDEX: 312
============================================================

Numeracy: can animals tell numbers? (Can animals
count?)

A
Prime among basic numerical faculties is the ability to distinguish between a larger and a
smaller, says psychologist Elizabeth Brannon. Humans can do this with ease – providing
the ratio is big enough – but do other animals share this ability? In one experiment, rhesus
monkeys and university students examined two sets of geometrical objects that appeared
briefly on a computer monitor. They had to decide which set contained more objects. Both
groups performed successfully but, importantly, Brannon’s team found that monkeys, like
humans, make more errors when two sets of objects are close in number. The students’
performance ends up looking just like a monkey’s. It’s practically identical, she says.

B

Humans and monkeys are mammals, in the animal family known as primates. These are
not the only animals whose numerical capacities rely on ratio, however. The same seems
to apply to some amphibians. Psychologist Claudia Uller’s team tempted salamanders with
two sets of fruit flies held in clear tubes. In a series of trials, the researchers noted which
tube the salamanders scampered towards, reasoning that if they had a capacity to
recognise the number, they would head for the larger number. The salamanders
successfully discriminated between tubes containing 8 and 16 flies respectively, but not
between 3 and 4, 4 and 6, or 8 and 12. So it seems that for the salamanders to
discriminate between two numbers, the larger must be at least twice as big as the smaller.
However, they could differentiate between 2 and 3 flies just as well as between 1 and 2
flies, suggesting they recognise small numbers in a different way from larger numbers.

C

Further support for this theory comes from studies of mosquitofish, which instinctively join
the biggest shoal they can. A team at the University of Padova found that while
mosquitofish can tell the difference between a group containing 3 shoal-mates and a group
containing 4, they did not show a preference between groups of 4 and 5. The team also
found that mosquitofish can discriminate between numbers up to 16, but only if the ratio
between the fish in each shoal was greater than 2:1. This indicates that the fish, like
salamanders, possess both the approximate and precise number systems found in more
intelligent animals such as infant humans and other primates.
D

While these findings are highly suggestive, some critics argue that the animals might be
relying on other factors to complete the tasks, without considering the number itself. ‘Any
study that’s claiming an animal is capable of representing number should also be
controlling for other factors,’ says Brannon. Experiments have confirmed that primates can
indeed perform numerical feats without extra clues, but what about the more primitive
animals?

E
To consider this possibility, the mosquitofish tests were repeated, this time using varying
geometrical shapes in place of fish. The team arranged these shapes so that they had the
same overall surface area and luminance even though they contained a different number of
objects. Across hundreds of trials on 14 different fish, the team found they consistently
discriminated 2 objects from 3. The team is now testing whether mosquitofish can also
distinguish 3 geometric objects from 4.
F

Even more primitive organisms may share this ability. Entomologist Jurgen Tautz sent a
group of bees down a corridor, at the end of which lay two chambers – one which
contained sugar water, which they like, while the other was empty. To test the bees’
numeracy, the team marked each chamber with a different number of geometrical shapes –
between 2 and 6. The bees quickly learned to match the number of shapes with the correct
chamber. Like the salamanders and fish, there was a limit to the bees’ mathematical
prowess – they could differentiate up to 4 shapes, but failed with 5 or 6 shapes.

G

These studies still do not show whether animals learn to count through training, or whether
they are born with the skills already intact. If the latter is true, it would suggest there was a
strong evolutionary advantage to a mathematical mind. Proof that this may be the case has
emerged from an experiment testing the mathematical ability of three – and four-day-old
chicks. Like mosquitofish, chicks prefer to be around as many of their siblings as possible,
so they will always head towards a larger number of their kin. If chicks spend their first few
days surrounded by certain objects, they become attached to these objects as if they were
family. Researchers placed each chick in the middle of a platform and showed it two
groups of balls of paper. Next, they hid the two piles behind screens, changed the
quantities and revealed them to the chick. This forced the chick to perform simple
computations to decide which side now contained the biggest number of its “brothers”.
Without any prior coaching, the chicks scuttled to the larger quantity at a rate well above
chance. They were doing some very simple arithmetic, claim the researchers.

H

Why these skills evolved is not hard to imagine, since it would help almost any animal
forage for food. Animals on the prowl for sustenance must constantly decide which tree has
the most fruit, or which patch of flowers will contain the most nectar. There are also other,
less obvious, advantages of numeracy. In one compelling example, researchers in America
found that female coots appear to calculate how many eggs they have laid – and add any
in the nest laid by an intruder – before making any decisions about adding to them. Exactly
how ancient these skills are is difficult to determine, however. Only by studying the
numerical abilities of more and more creatures using standardised procedures can we
hope to understand the basic preconditions for the evolution of number.

Questions 1-7

Answer the table below.

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER from the passage for
each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet
Animal numeracy

Subjects Experiments Results

Mammals and birds
looked at two sets of Performance of the two
rhesus monkeys and
geometrical objects on groups is
humans
a computer screen almost 1.....................
chose between two
chicks can do
sets
chicks calculations in order to
of 2..................... which
choose a larger group
are altered
behaviour of female A bird seems to have
coots
birds was observed ability to 3.....................
Amphibians, fish and insects
salamanders
offered clear tubes
distinguish between
containing different
salamanders numbers over four if
quantities
the bigger number is at
of 4.....................
least two times larger
shown real shoals and
later artificial ones of subjects know the
geometrical shapes; difference between two
5..................... these are used to checkand three and possibly
the influence of three and four, but not
total 6..................... and between four and five
brightness
Had to learn
could soon choose the
bees where 7..................... w
correct place
as stored

Questions 8-13
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?
In boxes 8-13 on your answer sheet, write
YES if the statement is true
NO if the statement is false
NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage


8..................... Primates are better at identifying the larger of two numbers if one is much
bigger than the other.

9..................... Jurgen Tautz trained the insects in his experiment to recognise the shapes
of individual numbers.

10..................... The research involving young chicks took place over two separate days.

11..................... The experiment with chicks suggests that some numerical ability exists in
newborn animals.

12..................... Researchers have experimented by altering quantities of nectar or fruit
available to certain wild animals.

13..................... When assessing the number of eggs in their nest, coots take into account
those of other birds.

Solution:

1. identical 8. TRUE
2. balls of paper 9. FALSE

10. NOT
3. calculate eggs
GIVEN
4. fruits flies 11. TRUE
12. NOT
5. mosquitofish
GIVEN
6. surface area 13. TRUE
7. sugar water
