TITLE: Nurturing talent within the family
INDEX: 314
============================================================

Nurturing talent within the family

What do we mean by being ‘talented’ or ‘gifted’? The most obvious way is to look at the
work someone does and if they are capable of significant success, label them as talented.
The purely quantitative route - ‘percentage definition’ - looks not at individuals, but at
simple percentages, such as the top five per cent of the population, and labels them - by
definition - as gifted. This definition has fallen from favour, eclipsed by the advent of IQ
tests, favoured by luminaries such as Professor Hans Eysenck, where a series of written or
verbal tests of general intelligence leads to a score of intelligence.
The IQ test has been eclipsed in turn. Most people studying intelligence and creativity in
the new millennium now prefer a broader definition, using a multifaceted approach where
talents in many areas are recognised rather than purely concentrating on academic
achievement. If we are therefore assuming that talented, creative or gifted individuals may
need to be assessed across a range of abilities, does this mean intelligence can run in
families as a genetic or inherited tendency? Mental dysfunction - such as schizophrenia -
can, so is an efficient mental capacity passed on from parent to child?

Animal experiments throw some light on this question, and on the whole area of whether it
is genetics, the environment or a combination of the two that allows for intelligence and
creative ability. Different strains of rats show great differences in intelligence or ‘rat
reasoning’. If these are brought up in normal conditions and then mn through a maze to
reach a food goal, the ‘bright’ strain make far fewer wrong turns that the ‘dull’ ones. But if
the environment is made dull and boring the number of errors becomes equal. Return the
rats to an exciting maze and the discrepancy returns as before - but is much smaller. In
other words, a dull rat in a stimulating environment will almost do as well as a bright rat
who is bored in a normal one. This principle applies to humans too - someone may be
born with innate intelligence, but their environment probably has the final say over whether
they become creative or even a genius.

Evidence now exists that most young children, if given enough opportunities and
encouragement, are able to achieve significant and sustainable levels of academic or
sporting prowess. Bright or creative children are often physically very active at the same
time, and so may receive more parental attention as a result - almost by default - in order to
ensure their safety. They may also talk earlier, and this, in turn, breeds parental interest.
This can sometimes cause problems with other siblings who may feel jealous even though
they themselves may be bright. Their creative talents may be undervalued and so never
come to fruition. Two themes seem to run through famously creative families as a result.
The first is that the parents were able to identify the talents of each child, and nurture and
encourage these accordingly but in an even-handed manner. Individual differences were
encouraged, and friendly sibling rivalry was not seen as a particular problem. If the father
is, say, a famous actor, there is no undue pressure for his children to follow him onto the
boards, but instead their chosen interests are encouraged. There need not even by any
obvious talent in such a family since there always needs to be someone who sets the
family career in motion, as in the case of the Sheen acting dynasty.

Martin Sheen was the seventh of ten children born to a Spanish immigrant father and an
Irish mother. Despite intense parental disapproval he turned his back on entrance exams to
university and borrowed cash from a local priest to start a fledgling acting career. His acting
successes in films such as Badlands and Apocalypse Now made him one of the most
highly-regarded actors of the 1970s. Three sons - Emilio Estevez, Ramon Estevez and
Charlie Sheen - have followed him into the profession as a consequence of being inspired
by his motivation and enthusiasm.

A stream seems to run through creative families. Such children are not necessarily
smothered with love by their parents. They feel loved and wanted, and are secure in their
home, but are often more surrounded by an atmosphere of work and where following a
calling appears to be important. They may see from their parents that it takes time and
dedication to be master of a craft, and so are in less of a hurry to achieve for themselves
once they start to work.

The generation of creativity is complex: it is a mixture of genetics, the environment,
parental teaching and luck that determines how successful or talented family members are.
This last point - luck - is often not mentioned where talent is concerned but plays an
undoubted part. Mozart, considered by many to be the finest composer of all time, was
lucky to be living in an age that encouraged the writing of music. He was brought up
surrounded by it, his father was a musician who encouraged him to the point of giving up
his job to promote his child genius, and he learnt musical composition with frightening
speed - the speed of a genius. Mozart himself simply wanted to create the finest music
ever written but did not necessarily view himself as a genius - he could write sublime music
at will, and so often preferred to lead a hedonistic lifestyle that he found more exciting than
writing music to order.

Albert Einstein and Bill Gates are two more examples of people whose talents have
blossomed by virtue of the times they were living in. Einstein was a solitary, somewhat slow
child who had affection at home but whose phenomenal intelligence emerged without any
obvious parental input. This may have been partly due to the fact that at the start of the
20th Century a lot of the Newtonian laws of physics were being questioned, leaving a fertile
ground for ideas such as his to be developed. Bill Gates may have had the creative vision
to develop Microsoft, but without the new computer age dawning at the same time he may
never have achieved the position on the world stage he now occupies.

Questions 1-2

Complete the notes, which show how the approaches to defining 'talent*have changed.

Choose ONE or TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer

Write your answers in boxes 1-2 on your answer sheet.

‘percentage definition’


1.....................


2.....................


Questions 3-5

Which THREE of the following does the writer regard as a feature of creative families?

Write the appropriate letters A-F in boxes 3-5 on your answer sheet.

A a higher than average level of parental affection

B competition between brothers and sisters

C parents who demonstrate vocational commitment

D strong motivation to take exams and attend university

E a patient approach to achieving success

F the identification of the most talented child in the family


Questions 6-7

Choose the appropriate letters A—D and write them in boxes 6-7 on your answer sheet.
6. The rat experiment was conducted to show that

A certain species of rat are more intelligent than others.

B intelligent rats are more motivated than ‘dull’ rats.
C a rat’s surroundings can influence its behaviour.

D a boring environment has little impact on a ‘bright’ rat.

7. The writer cites the story of Martin Sheen to show that

A he was the first in a creative line.

B his parents did not have his creative flair.
C he became an actor without proper training.

D his sons were able to benefit from his talents.


Questions 8-12

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage 3?

In boxes 8-12 on your answer sheet write

YES if the statement agrees with the writer s claims

NO if the statement contradicts the writers claims

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

8..................... Intelligence tests have now been proved to be unreliable.

9..................... The brother or sister of a gifted older child may fail to fulfil their own
potential.

10..................... The importance of luck in the genius equation tends to be ignored.

11..................... Mozart was acutely aware of his own remarkable talent.
12..................... Einstein and Gates would have achieved success in any era.


Questions 13

From the list below choose the most suitable title for the whole of Reading Passage 3.

Write the appropriate letter A-D in box 13 on your answer sheet.


A Geniuses in their time
B Education for the gifted

C Revising the definition of intelligence

D Nurturing talent within the family

Solution:

8. NOT
1. IQ/intelligence
GIVEN
2. multi-faceted approach 9. YES
3. B, C, E IN EITHER
10. YES
ORDER
4. B, C, E IN EITHER
11. NO
ORDER
5. B, C, E IN EITHER
12. NO
ORDER
6. C 13. D
7. A
