TITLE: Origin of Species & Continent Formation
INDEX: 322
============================================================

Origin of Species & Continent Formation

A

THE FACT THAT there was once a Pangean supercontinent, a Panthalassa Ocean, and a
Tethys Ocean, has profound implications for the evolution of multicellular life on Earth.
These considerations were unknown to the scientists of the 19th century – making their
scientific deductions even more remarkable. Quite independently of each other, Charles
Darwin and his young contemporary Alfred Russel Wallace reached the conclusion that life
had evolved by natural selection. Wallace later wrote in My Life of his own inspiration:

B

Why do some species die and some life? The answer was clearly that on the whole the
best fitted lived. From the effects of disease the most healthy escaped; from enemies the
strongest, the swiftest or the most cunning from famine the best hunters – then it suddenly
flashed on me that this self-acting process would improve the race, because in every
generation the inferior would inevitably be killed off and the superior would remain, that is,
the fittest would survive.

C
Both Darwin’s and Wallace’s ideas about natural selection had been influenced by the
essays of Thomas Malthus in his Principles of Population. Their conclusion, however, had
been the direct result of their personal observation of animals and plants in widely
separated geographic locations: Darwin from his experiences during the voyage of
the Beagle, and particularly during the ship’s visit to the Galapagos Islands in the East
Pacific in 1835; Wallace during his years of travel in the Amazon Basin and in the
Indonesia-Australian Archipelago in the 1850s.

D

Darwin had been documenting his ideas on natural selection for many years when he
received a paper on this selfsame subject from Wallace, who asked for Darwin’s opinion
and help in getting it published. In July 1858, Charles Lyell and J. D Hooker, close friends
of Darwin, pressed Darwin to present his conclusions so that he would not lose priority to
an unknown naturalist. Presiding over the hastily called but now historic meeting of the
Linnean Society in London, Lyell and Hooker explained to the distinguished members how
“these two gentlemen” (who were absent: Wallace was abroad and Darwin chose not to
attend), had “independently and unknown to one another, conceived the same very
ingenious theory,”

E
Both Darwin and Wallace had realized that the anomalous distribution of species in
particular regions had profound evolutionary significance. Subsequently, Darwin spent the
rest of his days in almost total seclusion thinking and writing mainly about the origin of
species. In contrast, Wallace applied himself to the science of biogeography, the study of
the pattern and distribution of species, and its significance, resulting in the publication of a
massive two-volume work the Geographical Distribution of Animals in 1876.
F

Wallace was a gentle and modest man, but also persistent and quietly courageous. He
spent years working in the most arduous possible climates and terrains, particularly in the
Malay archipelago, he made patient and detailed zoological observations and collected a
huge number of specimens for museums and collectors-which is how he made a living.
One result of his work was the conclusion that there is a distinct faunal boundary, called
“Wallace’s line,” between an Asian realm of animals in Java, Bronco and the Philipiones
and an Australian realm in New Guinea and Australia. In essence, this boundary posed a
difficult question: How on Earth did plants and animals with a clear affinity to the Northern
Hemisphere meet with their Southern Hemispheric counterparts along such a distinct
Malaysian demarcation zone? Wallace was uncertain about demarcation on one particular
island-Celebes, a curiously shaped place that is midway between the two groups. Initially,
he assigned its flora-fauna to the Australian side of the line, but later he transferred it to the
Asian side. Today we know the reason for his dilemma. 200MYA East and West Celebes
were islands with their own natural history lying on opposite sides of the Tethys Ocean.
They did not collide until about 15 MYA. The answer to the main question is that Wallace’s

Line categorizes Laurasia-derived flora-fauna (the Asian) and Gondwana-derived flora-
fauna (the Australian), fauna that had evolved on opposing shares of the Tethys. The
closure of the Tethys Ocean today is manifested by the ongoing collision of Australia/New
Guinea with Indochina/Indonesia and the continuing closure of the Mediterranean Sea – a
remnant of the Western Tethys Ocean.

G

IN HIS ORIGIN OF CONTINENTS AND OCEANS, Wegener quoted at length from
Wallace’s Geographical Distribution of Animals. According to Wegener’s reading, Wallace
had identified three clear divisions of Australian animals, which supported his own theory of
continental displacement. Wallace had shown that animals long established in
southwestern Australia had an affinity with animals in South Africa, Madagascar, India, and
Ceylon, but did not have an affinity with those in Asia. Wallace also showed that Australian
marsupials and monotremes are clearly related to those in South America, the Moluccas,
and various Pacific islands and that none are found in neighboring Indonesia. From this
and related data, Wegener concluded that the then broadly accepted “landbridge” theory
could not account for this distribution of animals and that only this theory of continental drift
could explain it.

H

The theory that Wegener dismissed in preference to his own proposed that plants and
animals had once migrated across now-submerged intercontinental landbridges. In 1885,
one of Europe’s leading geologists, Eduard Suess, theorized that as the rigid Earth cools,
its upper-crust shrinks and wrinkles like the withering skin of an aging apple. He suggested
that the planet’s seas and oceans now fill the wrinkles between once-contiguous plateaus.

I

Today, we know that we live on a dynamic Earth with shifting, colliding and separating
tectonic plates, not a “withering skin”, and the main debate in the field of biogeography has
shifted. The discussion now concerns “dispersalism” versus “vicarianism”: unrestricted
radiation of species on the one hand and the development of barriers to migration on the
other. Dispersion is a short-term phenomenon – the daily or seasonal migration of species
and their radiation to the limits of their natural environment on an extensive and continuous
landmass. Vicarian evolution, however, depends upon the separation and isolation of a
variety of species within the confines of natural barriers in the form of islands, lakes, or
shallow seas – topographical features that take a long time to develop.

Questions 1-5

Use the information in the passage to match the people (listed A-E) with opinions or deeds
below.

Write the appropriate letters A-E in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.


A Suess
B Wallace
C Darwin and Wallace

D Wegener
E Lyell and Hooker

1..................... urged Darwin to publish his scientific findings
2..................... Depicted physical feature of earth’s crust.

3..................... believed in continental drift theory while rejecting another one

4..................... Published works about wildlife distribution in a different region.

5..................... Evolution of species is based on selection by nature.


Questions 6-8

The Reading Passage has nine paragraphs A-I

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter A-I, in boxes 6-8 on your answer sheet.

6..................... Best adaptable animal survived on the planet.

7..................... Boundary called Wallace’s line found between Asia and Australia.

8..................... Animal relevance exists between Australia and Africa.


Questions 9-13

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage.

Using NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.


Write your answers in boxes 9-13 on your answer sheet.


Wegener found that continental drift instead of “land bridge” theory could explain strange
species’ distribution phenomenon. In his theory, vegetation and wildlife 9.....................
intercontinentally. However, Eduard Suess compared the wrinkle of crust to
10..................... of an old apple. Now it is well known that we are living on the planet where
there are 11..................... in constant mobile states instead of what Suess described. Hot
spot in biogeography is switched to concerns between two-terms: “12.....................” and
“13.....................”

Solution:

1. E 8. G
2. A 9. migrated

3. D 10. withering skin
4. B 11. plates

5. C 12. dispersalism
6. B 13. vicarisanism

7. F
