TITLE: Paper or Computer?
INDEX: 327
============================================================

Paper or Computer?

A. Computer technology was supposed to replace paper. But that hasn’t happened. Every
country in the Western world uses more paper today, on a per- capita basis, than it did ten
years ago. The consumption of uncoated free-sheet paper, for instance the most common
kind of office paper — rose almost fifteen per cent in the United States between 1995 and
2000. This is generally taken as evidence of how hard it is to eradicate old, wasteful habits
and of how stubbornly resistant we are to the efficiencies offered by computerization. A
number of cognitive psychologists and ergonomics experts, however, don’t agree. Paper
has persisted, they argue, for very good reasons: when it comes to performing certain
kinds of cognitive tasks, paper has many advantages over computers. The dismay people
feel at the sight of a messy desk — or the spectacle of air-traffic controllers tracking flights
through notes scribbled on paper strips – arises from a fundamental confusion about the
role that paper plays in our lives.

B. The case for paper is made most eloquently in “The Myth of the Paperless Office”, by
two social scientists, Abigail Sellen and Richard Harper. They begin their book with an
account of a study they conducted at the International Monetary Fund, in Washington, D.c.
Economists at the I.M.F. spend most of their time writing reports on complicated economic
questions, work that would seem to be perfectly suited to sitting in front of a computer.

Nonetheless, the I.M.F. is awash in paper, and Sellen and Harper wanted to find out why.
Their answer is that the business of writing reports – at least at the I.M.F. is an intensely
collaborative process, involving the professional judgments and contributions of many
people. The economists bring drafts of reports to conference rooms, spread out the
relevant pages, and negotiate changes with one other. They go back to their offices and jot
down comments in the margin, taking advantage of the freedom offered by the informality
of the handwritten note. Then they deliver the annotated draft to the author in person,
taking him, page by page, through the suggested changes. At the end of the process, the
author spreads out all the pages with comments on his desk and starts to enter them on
the computer — moving the pages around as he works, organizing and reorganizing,
saving and discarding.


C. Without paper, this kind of collaborative and iterative work process would be much more
difficult. According to Sellen and Harper, paper has a unique set of “affordances” — that is,
qualities that permit specific kinds of uses. Paper is tangible: we can pick up a document,
flip through it, read little bits here and there, and quickly get a sense of it. Paper is spatially
flexible, meaning that we can spread it out and arrange it in the way that suits US best. And
it’s tailorable: we can easily annotate it, and scribble on it as we read, without altering the
original text. Digital documents, of course, have then own affordances. They can be easily
searched, shared, stored, accessed remotely, and linked to other relevant material. But
they lack the affordances that really matter to a group of people working together on a
report. Sellen and Harper write:

D. Paper enables a certain kind of thinking. Picture, for instance, the top of your desk.
Chances are that you have a keyboard and a computer screen off to one side, and a clear
space roughly eighteen inches square in front of your chair. What covers the rest of the
desktop is probably piles- piles of papers, journals, magazines, binders, postcards,
videotapes, and all the other artifacts of the knowledge economy. The piles look like a
mess, but they aren’t. When a group at Apple Computer studied piling behavior several
years ago, they found that even the most disorderly piles usually make perfect sense to the
piler, and that office workers could hold forth in great detail about the precise history and
meaning of thefr piles. The pile closest to the cleared, eighteen-inch-square working area,
for example, generally represents the most urgent business, and within that pile the most
important document of all is likely to be at the top. Piles are living, breathing archives. Over
time, they get broken down and resorted, sometimes chronologically and sometimes
thematically and sometimes chronologically and thematically; clues about certain
documents may be physically embedded in the file by, say, stacking a certain piece of
paper at an angle or inserting dividers into the stack.

E. But why do we pile documents instead of filing them? Because piles represent the
process of active, ongoing thinking. The psychologist Alison Kidd, whose research Sellen
and Harper refer to extensively, argues that “knowledge workers” use the physical space of
the desktop to hold “ideas which they cannot yet categorize or even decide how they might
use.” The messy desk is not necessarily a sign of disorganization. It may be a sign of
complexity: those who deal with many unresolved ideas simultaneously cannot sort and file
the papers on their desks, because they haven’t yet sorted and filed the ideas in their head.
Kidd writes that many of the people she talked to use the papers on their desks as
contextual cues to’’ recover a complex set of threads without difficulty and delay” when they
come in on a Monday morning, or after their work has been interrupted by a phone call.
What we see when we look at the piles on our desks is, in a sense, the contents of our
brains.


F. This idea that paper facilitates a highly specialized cognitive and social process is a far
cry from the way we have historically thought about the stuff. Paper first began to
proliferate in the workplace in the late nineteenth century as part of the move toward

“systematic management.” To cope with the complexity of the industrial economy,
managers were instituting company-wide policies and demanding monthly, weekly, or even
daily updates from their subordinates. Thus was born the monthly sales report, and the
office manual and the internal company newsletter. The typewriter took off in the eighteen-
eighties, making it possible to create documents in a fraction of the time it had previously
taken, and that was followed closely by the advent of carbon paper, which meant that a
typist could create ten copies of that document simultaneously. Paper was important not to
facilitate creative collaboration and thought but as an instrument of control.

Questions 1-6

The reading passage has seven paragraphs, A-F

Choose the correct heading for paragraphs A-F from the list below. Write the correct
number, i-xi, in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.

List of Headings
i. paper continued as a sharing or managing must
ii. piles can be more inspiring rather than disorgnising
iii. Favorable situation that economists used paper pages
iv. overview of an unexpected situation: paper survived
v. comparison between efficiencies for using paper and using computer
vi. IMF’ paperless office seemed to be a waste of papers
vii. example of failure for avoidance of paper record
viii. There are advantages of using a paper in offices
ix. piles reflect certain characteristics in people’ thought
x. joy of having the paper square in front of computer

1..................... Paragraph A
2..................... Paragraph B

3..................... Paragraph C

4..................... Paragraph D

5..................... Paragraph E

6..................... Paragraph F


Questions 7-10

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage, using no more
than three words from the Reading Passage for each answer. Write your answers in
boxes 7-10 on your answer sheet.

Compared with digital documents, paper has several advantages. First it allows clerks to
work in a 7...................... way among colleagues. Next, paper is not like virtual digital
versions, it’s 8......................Finally, because it is 9....................., note or comments can be
effortlessly added as related information. However, shortcoming comes at the absence of
convenience on task which is for a 10......................

Questions 11-14

Choose the correct letter, A, B, c or D.
Write your answers in boxes 11-14 on your answer sheet.

11. What do the economists from IMF say that their way of writing documents?

A they note down their comments for freedom on the drafts

B they finish all writing individually

C they share ideas on before electronic version was made

D they use electronic version fully

12. What is the implication of the “Piles ” mentioned in the passage?

A they have underlying orders
B they are necessarily a mess

C they are in time sequence order

D they are in alphabetic order


13. What does the manager believe in sophisticated economy?

A recorded paper can be as management tool

B carbon paper should be compulsory

C Teamwork is the most important

D monthly report is the best way

14. According to the end of this passage, what is the reason why paper is not replaced by
electronic vision?

A paper is inexpensive to buy
B it contributed to management theories in western countries

C people need time for changing their old habit

D it is collaborative and functional for tasks implement and management

Solution:

1. iv 8. Tangible
2. iii 9. Tailorable

3. v 10. report
4. ii 11. C

5. ix 12. A
6. viii 13. D

7. Collaborative 14. D
