TITLE: Plant Scents
INDEX: 334
============================================================

Plant Scents

A

Everyone is familiar with scented flowers, and many people have heard that floral odors
help the plant attract pollinators. This common notion is mostly correct, but it is surprising
how little scientific proof of it exists. Of course, not all flowers are pollinated by biological
agents – for example, many grasses are wind-pollinated – but the flowers of the grasses
may still emit volatiles. In fact, plants emit organic molecules all the time, although they
may not be obvious to the human nose. As for flower scents that we can detect with our
noses, bouquets that attract moths and butterflies generally smell “sweet,” and those that
attract certain flies seem “rotten” to us.
B


The release of volatiles from vegetative parts of the plant is familiar, although until recently
the physiological functions of these chemicals were less clear and had received much less
attention from scientists. When the trunk of a pine tree is injured – for example, when a
beetle tries to burrow into it – it exudes a very smelly resin. This resin consists mostly of
terpenes – hydrocarbons with a backbone of 10, 15 or 20 carbons that may also contain
atoms of oxygen. The heavier C20 terpenes, called diterpenes, are glue-like and can cover
and immobilize insects as they plug the hole. This defense mechanism is as ancient as it is
effective: Many samples of fossilized resin, or amber, contain the remains of insects
trapped inside. Many other plants emit volatiles when injured, and in some cases the
emitted signal helps defend the plant. For example, (Z)-3-hexenyl acetate, which is known
as a “green leaf volatile” because it is emitted by many plants upon injury, deters females
of the moth Heliothis virescens from laying eggs on injured tobacco plants. Interestingly,
the profile of emitted tobacco volatiles is different at night than during the day, and it is the
nocturnal blend, rich in several (Z)-3-hexen-1-olesters, that is most effective in repelling the
night-active H. virescens moths.

C

Herbivore induced volatiles often serve as indirect defenses. These bulwarks exist in a
variety of plant species, including corn, beans, and the model plant species Arabidopsis
thaliana. Plants not only emit volatiles acutely, at the site where caterpillars, mites, aphids
or similar insects are eating them but also generally from non-damaged parts of the plant.

These signals attract a variety of predatory insects that prey on the plant-eaters. For
example, some parasitic wasps can detect the volatile signature of a damaged plant and
will lay their eggs inside the offending caterpillar; eventually, the wasp eggs hatch, and the
emerging larvae feed on the caterpillar from the inside hatch, and the emerging larvae feed
on the caterpillar from the inside out. The growth of infected caterpillars is retarded
considerably, to the benefit of the plant. Similarly, volatiles released by plants in response
to herbivore egg laying can attract parasites of the eggs, thereby preventing them from
hatching and avoiding the onslaught of hungry herbivores that would have emerged. Plant
volatiles can also be used as a kind of currency in some very indirect defensive schemes.

In the rainforest understory tree Leonardoxa Africana, ants of the species Petalomyrmex
phylax patrol young leaves and attack any herbivorous insects that they encounter. The
young leaves emit high levels of the volatile compound methyl salicylate, a compound that
the ants use either as a pheromone or as an antiseptic in their nests. It appears that methyl
salicylate is both an attractant and a reward offered by the tree to get the ants to perform
this valuable deterrent role.

D

Floral scent has a strong impact on the economic success of many agricultural crops that
rely on insect pollinators, including fruit trees such as the bee-pollinated cherry, apple,
apricot and peach, as well as vegetables and tropical plants such as papaya. Pollination
not only affects crop yield, but also the quality and efficiency of crop production. Many
crops require most, if not all, ovules to be fertilized for optimum fruit size and shape. A
decrease in fragrance emission reduces the ability of flowers to attract pollinators and
results in considerable losses for growers, particularly for introduced species that had a
specialized pollinator in their place of origin. This problem has been exacerbated by recent
disease epidemics that have killed many honeybees, the major insect pollinators in the
United States.

E

One means by which plant breeders circumvent the pollination problem is by breeding self-
compatible, or apomictic, varieties that do not require fertilization. Although this solution is
adequate, its drawbacks include near genetic uniformity and consequent susceptibility to
pathogens. Some growers have attempted to enhance honeybee foraging by spraying
scent compounds on orchard trees, but this approach was costly, had to be repeated, had
potentially toxic effects on the soil or local biota, and, in the end, proved to be inefficient.

The poor effectiveness of this strategy probably reflects inherent limitations of the artificial,
topically applied compounds, which clearly fail to convey the appropriate message to the
bees. For example, general spraying of the volatile mixture cannot tell the insects where
exactly the blossoms are. Clearly, a more refined strategy is needed. The ability to
enhance existing floral scent, which could all be accomplished by genetic engineering,
would allow us to manipulate the types of insect pollinators and the frequency of their visits.
Moreover, the metabolic engineering of fragrance could increase crop protection against
pathogens and pests.

F

Genetic manipulation of the scent will also benefit the floriculture industry. Ornamentals,
including cut flowers, foliage and potted plants, play an important aesthetic role in human
life. Unfortunately, traditional breeding has often produced cultivars with improved vase life,
shipping characteristics, color and shape while sacrificing desirable perfumes. The loss of
scent among ornamentals, which have a worldwide value of more than $30 billion, makes
them important targets for the genetic manipulation of flower fragrance. Some work has
already begun in this area, as several groups have created petunia and carnation plants
that express the linalool synthase gene from C. Breweri. These experiments are still
preliminary: For technical reasons, the gene was expressed everywhere in the plant, and
although the transgenic plants did create small amounts of linalool, the level was below the
threshold of detection for the human nose. Similar experiments in tobacco used genes for
other monoterpene synthases, such as the one that produces limonene, but gave similar
results.
G

The next generation of experiments, already in progress, includes sophisticated schemes
that target the expression of scent genes specifically to flowers or other organs – such as
special glands that can store antimicrobial or herbivore-repellent compounds.

Questions 1-4

The Reading Passage has seven paragraphs A-G.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter A-G, in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.


1..................... Substance released to help plants themselves.
2..................... Scent helps plant’s pollination.

3..................... Practice on genetic experiment of fragrance.

4..................... Plant’s scent attracts herbivore’s enemy for protection.


Questions 5-8

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?

In boxes 5-8 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement is true

FALSE if the statement is false

NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage


5..................... We have few evidence to support the idea that scent attracts pollinators.


6..................... Heliothis virescens won’t eat those tobacco leaves on which they laid
eggs.


7..................... Certain ants are attracted by volatiles to guard plants in rainforest.

8..................... Pollination only affects fruit trees’ production rather than other crop trees.


Questions 9-13

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write your answers in boxes 9-13 on your answer sheet.


9 How do wasps protect plants when they are attracted by scents according to the
passage?
A plants induce wasps to prey herbivore.

B wasps lay eggs into caterpillars.

C wasps laid eggs on plants to expel herbivore.

D offending caterpillars and wasp eggs coexist well.


10 What reason caused a number of honeybees decline in the United States.

A pollination process

B spread illness

C crop trees are poisonous

D grower’s overlook


11 Which of the following drawbacks about artificial fragrance is NOT mentioned in the
passage?

A it’s very expensive

B it can’t tell correct information to pollinators.
C it needs massive manual labour

D it poisons local environment


12 The number of $30 billion quoted in the passage is to illustrate the fact that:

A favorable perfumes are made from ornamental flowers.


B traditional floriculture industry needs reform.


C genetic operation on scent can make a vast profit.

D Scent plays a significant role in Ornamental industry.


13 What is weakness of genetic experiments on fragrance?

A Linalool level is too low to be smelt by nose

B no progress made in linalool emission.
C experiment on tobacco has a better result

D transgenic plants produce intense scent
6

Solution:

1. B 8. FALSE
2. A 9. B

3. F 10. B
4. C 11. C

5. TRUE 12. D
6. NOT GIVEN 13. A

7. TRUE
