TITLE: Population viability analysis
INDEX: 338
============================================================

Population viability analysis

Part A

To make political decisions about the extent and type of forestry in a region it is important
to understand the consequences of those decisions. One tool for assessing the impact of
forestry on the ecosystem is population viability analysis (PVA). This is a tool for predicting
the probability that a species will become extinct in a particular region over a specific
period. It has been successfully used in the United States to provide input into resource
exploitation decisions and assist wildlife managers and there is now enormous potential for
using population viability to assist wildlife management in Australia’s forests.

A species becomes extinct when the last individual dies. This observation is a useful
starting point for any discussion of extinction as it highlights the role of luck and chance in
the extinction process. To make a prediction about extinction we need to understand the
processes that can contribute to it and these fall into four broad categories which are
discussed below.

Part B
Early attempts to predict population viability were based on demographic uncertainty Whether an individual
A
survives from one year to the next will largely be a matter of chance. Some pairs may produce several young
in a single year while others may produce none in that same year. Small populations will fluctuate
enormously because of the random nature of birth and death and these chance fluctuations can cause
species extinctions even if, on average, the population size should increase. Taking only this uncertainty of
ability to reproduce into account, extinction is unlikely if the number of individuals in a population is above
about 50 and the population is growing.

Small populations cannot avoid a certain amount of inbreeding. This is particularly true if there is a very small
B
number of one sex. For example, if there are only 20 individuals of a species and only one is a male, all
future individuals in the species must be descended from that one male. For most animal species such
individuals are less likely to survive and reproduce. Inbreeding increases the chance of extinction.
Variation within a species is the raw material upon which natural selection acts. Without genetic variability a
C
species lacks the capacity to evolve and cannot adapt to changes in its environment or to new predators and
new diseases. The loss of genetic diversity associated with reductions in population size will contribute to the
likelihood of extinction.
Recent research has shown that other factors need to be considered. Australia’s environment fluctuates
D
enormously from year to year. These fluctuations add yet another degree of uncertainty to the survival of
many species. Catastrophes such as fire, flood, drought or epidemic may reduce population sizes to a small
fraction of their average level. When allowance is made for these two additional elements of uncertainty the
population size necessary to be confident of persistence for a few hundred years may increase to several
thousand.

Part C
Beside these processes we need to bear in mind the distribution of a population. A species
that occurs in five isolated places each containing 20 individuals will not have the same
probability of extinction as a species with a single population of 100 individuals in a single
locality.
Where logging occurs (that is, the cutting down of forests for timber) forest- dependent
creatures in that area will be forced to leave. Ground-dwelling herbivores may return within
a decade. However, arboreal marsupials (that is animals which live in trees) may not
recover to pre-logging densities for over a century. As more forests are logged, animal
population sizes will be reduced further. Regardless of the theory or model that we choose,
a reduction in population size decreases the genetic diversity of a population and increases
the probability of extinction because of any or all of the processes listed above. It is
therefore a scientific fact that increasing the area that is loaded in any region will increase
the probability that forest-dependent animals will become extinct.

Questions 1-4

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Part A of Reading
Passage?

In boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet write

YES if the statement agrees with the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
Example Answer

A link exist between the consequences of decisions and the decision making process itself.
YES

1..................... Scientists are interested in the effect of forestry on native animals.

2..................... PVA has been used in Australia for many years.
3..................... A species is said to be extinct when only one individual exists.

4..................... Extinction is a naturally occurring phenomenon.


Questions 5-8

These questions are based on Part B of Reading Passage.
In paragraphs A to D the author describes four processes which may contribute to the
extinction of a species.

Match the list ofprocesses (i-vi) to the paragraphs.

Write the appropriate number (i-vi) in boxes 5-8 on your answer sheet.

NB There are more processes than paragraphs so you will not use all of them.

5.........
........... Paragraph A
Processes
.
i Loss of ability to adapt
6.........
ii Natural disasters
........... Paragraph B
. iii An imblance of the sexes
7......... iv Human disasters
........... Paragraph C
v Evolution
.
The haphazard nature of
8......... vi
reproduction
........... Paragraph D
.

Questions 9-11

Based on your reading of Part C, complete the sentences below with words taken from the
passage.

Use NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for boxes 9-11 on your answer sheet.

9. While the population of a species may be on the increase, there is always a chance that
small isolated groups 9......................

10. Survival of a species depends on a balance between the size of a population and
its 10......................

11. The likelihood that animals which live in forests will become extinct is increased
when 11......................


Questions 12

Choose the appropriate letter A-D and write it in box 12 on your answer sheet.

12 An alternative heading for the passage could be:

A The protection of native flora and fauna

B Influential factors in assessing survival probability

C An economic rationale for the logging of forests

D Preventive measures for the extinction of a species

Solution:

1. YES 7. i
2. NO 8. ii

9. will/may not
3. NO survive//will/may/could become
extinct

4. NOT
10. locality//distribution
GIVEN
5. vi 11. logging takes place/occurs
6. iii 12. B
