TITLE: Radio Automation
INDEX: 348
============================================================

Radio Automation

Today they are everywhere. Production lines controlled by computers and operated by
robots. There’s no chatter of assembly workers, just the whirr and click of machines. In the
mid-1940s, the workerless factory was still the stuff of science fiction. There were no
computers to speak of and electronics was primitive. Yet hidden away in the English
countryside was a highly automated production line called ECME, which could turn out
1500 radio receivers a day with almost no help from human hands.

A. John Sargrove, the visionary engineer who developed the technology, was way ahead
of his time. For more than a decade, Sargrove had been trying to figure out how to make
cheaper radios. Automating the manufacturing process would help. But radios didn’t lend
themselves to such methods: there were too many parts to fit together and too many wires
to solder. Even a simple receiver might have 30 separate components and 80 hand-
soldered connections. At every stage, things had to be tested and inspected. Making radios
required highly skilled labour—and lots of it.

B. In 1944, Sargrove came up with the answer. His solution was to dispense with most of
the fiddly bits by inventing a primitive chip—a slab of Bakelite with all the receiver’s
electrical components and connections embedded in it. This was something that could be
made by machines, and he designed those too. At the end of the war, Sargrove built an
automatic production line, which he called ECME (electronic circuit-making equipment), in
a small factory in Effingham, Surrey.


C. An operator sat at one end of each ECME line, feeding in die plates. She didn’t need
much skill, only quick hands. From now on, everything was controlled by electronic
switches and relays. First stop was the sandblaster, which roughened the surface of the
plastic BO that molten metal would stick to it The plates were then cleaned to remove any
traces of grit The machine automatically checked that the surface was rough enough
before sending the plate to the spraying section. There, eight nozzles rotated into position
and sprayed molten zinc over both sides of the plate. Again, the nozzles only began to
spray when a plate was in place. The plate whizzed on. The next stop was the milling
machine, which ground away the surface layer of metal to leave the circuit and other
components in the grooves and recesses. Now the plate was a composite of metal and
plastic. It sped on to be lacquered and have its circuits tested. By the time it emerged from
the end of the line, robot hands had fitted it with sockets to attach components such as
valves and loudspeakers. When ECME was working flat out; the whole process took 20
seconds.


D. ECME was astonishingly advanced. Electronic eyes, photocells that generated a small
current when a panel arrived, triggered each step in the operation, BO avoiding excessive
wear and tear on the machinery. The plates were automatically tested at each stage as
they moved along the conveyor. And if more than two plates in succession were duds, the
machines were automatically adjusted—or if necessary halted In a conventional factory, I
workers would test faulty circuits and repair them. But Sargrove’s assembly line produced
circuits so cheaply they just threw away the faulty ones. Sargrove’s circuit board was even
more astonishing for the time. It predated the more familiar printed circuit, with wiring
printed on aboard, yet was more sophisticated. Its built-in components made it more like a
modem chip.

E. When Sargrove unveiled his invention at a meeting of the British Institution of Radio
Engineers in February 1947, the assembled engineers were impressed. So was the man
from The Times. ECME, he reported the following day, “produces almost without human
labour, a complete radio receiving set. This new method of production can be equally well
applied to television and other forms of electronic apparatus.


F. The receivers had many advantages over their predecessors, wit components they were
more robust. Robots didn’t make the sorts of mistakes human assembly workers
sometimes did. “Wiring mistakes just cannot happen,” wrote Sargrove. No w es also meant
the radios were lighter and cheaper to ship abroad. And with no soldered wires to come
unstuck, the radios were more reliable. Sargrove pointed out that the drcuit boards didn’t
have to be flat. They could be curved, opening up the prospect of building the electronics
into the cabinet of Bakelite radios.

G. Sargrove was all for introducing this type of automation to other products. It could be
used to make more complex electronic equipment than radios, he argued. And even if only
part of a manufacturing process were automated, the savings would be substantial. But
while his invention was brilliant, his timing was bad. ECME was too advanced for its own
good. It was only competitive on huge production runs because each new job meant
retooling the machines. But disruption was frequent. Sophisticated as it was, ECME still
depended on old- fashioned electromechanical relays and valves—which failed with
monotonous regularity. The state of Britain’s economy added to Sargrove’s troubles.
Production was dogged by power cuts and post-war shortages of materials. Sargrove’s
financial backers began to get cold feet.


H. There was another problem Sargrove hadn’t foreseen. One of ECME’s biggest
advantages—the savings on the cost of labour—also accelerated its downfall. Sargrove’s
factory had two ECME production lines to produce the two c cuits needed for each radio.

Between them these did what a thousand assembly workers would otherwise have done.
Human hands were needed only to feed the raw material in at one end and plug the valves
into then sockets and fit the loudspeakers at the other. After that, the only job left was to fit
the pair of Bakelite panels into a radio cabinet and check that it worked.

I. Sargrove saw automation as the way to solve post-war labour shortages. With somewhat
Utopian idealism, he imagined his new technology would free people from boring, repetitive
jobs on the production line and allow them to do more interesting work. “Don’t get the idea
that we are out to rob people of then jobs,” he told the Daily Mnror. “Our task is to liberate
men and women from being slaves of machines.”

J. The workers saw things differently. They viewed automation in the same light as the
everlasting light bulb or the suit that never wears out—as a threat to people’s livelihoods. If
automation spread, they wouldn’t be released to do more exciting jobs. They’d be released
to join the dole queue. Financial backing for ECME fizzled out. The money dried up. And

Britain lost its lead in a technology that would transform industry just a few years later.

Questions 1-7

Summary

The following diagram explains the process of ECME:

Complete the following chart of the paragraphs of Reading Passage, using no more than
two words from the Reading Passage for each answer. Write your answers in boxes 1-7 on
your answer sheet


1.....................

2.....................

3.....................
4.....................

5.....................

6.....................

7.....................


Questions 8-11

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage. using NO more
than two words from the Reading Passage for each answer. Writs your answers
inboxes 8-11 on your answer sheet

Summary

Sargrove had been dedicated to create a 8..................... radio by automation of
manufacture. The old version of radio had a large number of independent 9......................
After this innovation made, wireless-style radios became 10..................... and inexpensive
to export oversea. As the Saigrove saw it, the real benefit of ECME’s radio was that it
reduced 11..................... of manual work; which can be easily copied to other industries of
manufacturing electronic devices.


Questions 12-13

Choose the correct letter A, B, C or D.
Write your answers inboxes 12-13 on your answer sheet

12. What were workers attitude towards ECME Model initialy

A anxious
B welcoming

C boring

D inspiring

13. What is the main idea of this passage?

A approach to reduce the price of radio

B a new generation of fully popular products and successful business

C in application of die automation in the early stage


D ECME technology can be applied in many product fields

Solution:

1. chip 8. cheaper
2. grit 9. components

3. milten zinc 10. lighter
4. milling machine 11. cost

5. sockets 12. A
6. loudspeakers 13. D

7. valves
