TITLE: Reading in a whole new way
INDEX: 353
============================================================

Reading in a whole new way

As technology improves, how does the act of reading change?

Reading and writing, like all technologies, are constantly changing. In ancient times,
authors often dictated their books. Dictation sounded like an uninterrupted series of words,
so scribes wrote these down in one long continuous string, justastheyoccurinspeech. For
this reason, text was written without spaces between words until the 11th century.

This continuous script made books hard to read, so only a few people were accomplished
at reading them aloud to others. Being able to read silently to yourself was considered an
amazing talent; writing was an even rarer skill. In fact, in 15th-century Europe, only one in
20 adult males could write.

After Gutenberg’s invention of the printing press in about 1440, mass-produced books
changed the way people read and wrote. The technology of printing increased the number
of words available, and more types of media, such as newspapers and magazines,
broadened what was written about. Authors no longer had to produce scholarly works, as
was common until then, but could write, for example, inexpensive, heart-rending love
stories or publish autobiographies, even if they were unknown.

In time, the power of the written word gave birth to the idea of authority and expertise. Laws
were compiled into official documents, contracts were written down and nothing was valid
unless it was in this form. Painting, music, architecture, dance were all important, but the
heartbeat of many cultures was the turning pages of a book. By the early 19th century,
public libraries had been built in many cities.

Today, words are migrating from paper to computers, phones, laptops and game consoles.
Some 4.5 billion digital screens illuminate our lives. Letters are no longer fixed in black ink
on paper, but flitter on a glass surface in a rainbow of colors as fast as our eyes can blink.
Screens fill our pockets, briefcases, cars, living-room walls and the sides of buildings. They
sit in front of us when we work - regardless of what we do. And of course, these newly
ubiquitous screens have changed how we read and write.

The first screens that overtook culture, several decades ago - the big, fat, warm tubes of
television - reduced the time we spent reading to such an extent that it seemed as if
reading and writing were over. Educators and parents worried deeply that the TV
generation would be unable to write. But the interconnected, cool, thin displays of computer
screens launched an epidemic of writing that continues to swell. As a consequence, the
amount of time people spend reading has almost tripled since 1980. By 2008, the World
Wide Web contained more than a trillion pages, and that total grows rapidly every day.

But it is not book reading or newspaper reading, it is screen reading. Screens are always
on, and, unlike books, we never stop staring at them. This new platform is very visual, and
it is gradually merging words with moving images. You might think of this new medium as
books we watch, or television we read. We also use screens to present data, and this
encourages numeracy: visualising data and reading charts, looking at pictures and symbols
are all part of this new literacy.

Screens engage our bodies, too. The most we may do while reading a book is to flip the
pages or turn over a corner, but when we use a screen, we interact with what we see. In
the futuristic movie Minority Report, the main character stands in front of a screen and
hunts through huge amounts of information as if conducting an orchestra. Just as it
seemed strange five centuries ago to see someone read silently, in the future it will seem
strange to read without moving your body.

In addition, screens encourage more utilitarian (practical) thinking. A new idea or unfamiliar
fact will cause a reflex to do something: to research a word, to question your screen
‘friends’ for their opinions or to find alternative views. Book reading strengthened our
analytical skills, encouraging us to think carefully about how we feel. Screen reading, on
the other hand, encourages quick responses, associating this idea with another, equipping
us to deal with the thousands of new thoughts expressed every day. For example, we
review a movie for our friends while we watch it; we read the owner’s manual of a device
we see in a shop before we purchase it, rather than after we get home and discover that it
can’t do what we need it to do.

Screens provoke action instead of persuasion. Propaganda is less effective, and false
information is hard to deliver in a world of screens because while misinformation travels
fast, corrections do, too. On a screen, it is often easier to correct a falsehood than to tell
one in the first place. Wikipedia works so well because it removes an error in a single click.
In books, we find a revealed truth; on the screen, we assemble our own truth from pieces.
What is more, a screen can reveal the inner nature of things. Waving the camera eye of a
smartphone over the bar code of a manufactured product reveals its price, origins and even
relevant comments by other owners. It is as if the screen displays the object’s intangible
essence. A popular children’s toy (Webkinz) instills stuffed animals with a virtual character
that is ‘hidden’ inside; a screen enables children to play with this inner character online in a
virtual world.

In the near future, screens will be the first place we’ll look for answers, for friends, for news,
for meaning, for our sense of who we are and who we can be.

Questions 1-5

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

1 What does the writer say about dictation?

A It helped people learn to read.

B It affected the way people wrote.

C It was not used until the 11th century.
D It was used mainly for correspondence.

2 According to the writer, what changed after the invention of the printing press?

A Romance became more popular than serious fiction.

B Newspapers became more popular than books.

C Readers asked for more autobiographies.

D Authors had a wider choice of topics.

3 In the third paragraph, the writer focuses on the

A legal concerns of authors.
B rapid changes in public libraries.

C growing status of the written word.

D recognition of the book as an art form.

4 What does the writer say about screens in the fourth paragraph?

A They are hard to read.

B They are bad for our health.

C They can improve our work.

D They can be found everywhere.
5 According to the writer, computers differ from television because they

A encourage more reading.

B attract more criticism.

C take up more of our leisure time.

D include more educational content.


Questions 6-10

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage 3?
Write

YES if the statement agrees with the views of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the views of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

6..................... Screen reading has reduced the number of books and newspapers people
read.
7..................... Screen literacy requires a wider range of visual skills than book-based
literacy.
8..................... Screen reading is more active than book reading.

9..................... Screens and books produce similar thought patterns in their readers.

10..................... People are easily persuaded to believe lies on the screen.


Questions 11-14

Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-F, below.

11..................... The film Minority Report illustrates

12..................... Our behaviour when we watch a film shows

13..................... Wikipedia’s success relies on

14..................... Webkinz is an example of


A the accuracy of its information.

B people’s ability to concentrate.

C the global use of the Internet.

D how people behave physically when they read screens.
E the screen’s ability to make an object seem real.

F how rapidly opinions can be communicated.

Solution:

1. B 8. YES
2. D 9. NO

3. C 10. NO
4. D 11. D

5. A 12. F
6. NOT GIVEN 13. A

7. YES 14. E
