TITLE: READING THE SCREEN
INDEX: 355
============================================================

READING THE SCREEN

Are the electronic media exacerbating illiteracy and making our children stupid? On the
contrary, says Colin McCabe, they have the potential to make us truly literate.

The debate surrounding literacy is one of the most charged in education. On the one hand
there is an army of people convinced that traditional skills of reading and writing are
declining. On the other, a host of progressives protest that literacy is much more
complicated than a simple technical mastery of reading and writing. This second position is
supported by most of the relevant academic work over the past 20 years. These studies
argue that literacy can only be understood in its social and technical context. In

Renaissance England, for example, many more people could read than could write, and
within reading there was a distinction between those who could read print and those who
could manage the more difficult task of reading manuscript. An understanding of these
earlier periods helps us understand today’s ‘crisis in literacy’ debate.

There does seem to be evidence that there has been an overall decline in some aspects of
reading and writing - you only need to compare the tabloid newspapers of today with those
of 50 years ago to see a clear decrease in vocabulary and simplification of syntax. But the
picture is not uniform and doesn’t readily demonstrate the simple distinction between
literate and illiterate which had been considered adequate since the middle of the 19th
century.

While reading a certain amount of writing is as crucial as it has ever been in industrial
societies, it is doubtful whether a fully extended grasp of either is as necessary as it was 30
or 40 years ago. While print retains much of its authority as a source of topical information,
television has increasingly usurped this role. The ability to write fluent letters has been
undermined by the telephone and research suggests that for many people the only use for
writing, outside formal education, is the compilation of shopping lists.

The decision of some car manufacturers to issue their instructions to mechanics as a video
pack rather than as a handbook might be taken to spell the end of any automatic link
between industrialisation and literacy. On the other hand, it is also the case that ever-
increasing numbers of people make their living out of writing, which is better rewarded than
ever before. Schools are generally seen as institutions where the book rules - film,
television and recorded sound have almost no place; but it is not clear that this opposition
is appropriate. While you may not need to read and write to watch television, you certainly
need to be able to read and write in order to make programmes.

Those who work in the new media are anything but illiterate. The traditional oppositions
between old and new media are inadequate for understanding the world which a young
child now encounters. The computer has re-established a central place for the written word
on the screen, which used to be entirely devoted to the image. There is even anecdotal
evidence that children are mastering reading and writing in order to get on to the Internet.
There is no reason why the new and old media cannot be integrated in schools to provide
the skills to become economically productive and politically enfranchised.

Nevertheless, there is a crisis in literacy and it would be foolish to ignore it. To understand
that literacy may be declining because it is less central to some aspects of everyday life is
not the same as acquiescing in this state of affairs. The production of school work with the
new technologies could be a significant stimulus to literacy. How should these new
technologies be introduced into the schools? It isn’t enough to call for computers,
camcorders and edit suites in every classroom; unless they are properly integrated into the
educational culture, they will stand unused. Evidence suggests that this is the fate of most
information technology used in the classroom. Similarly, although media studies are now
part of the national curriculum, and more and more students are now clamouring to take
these course, teachers remain uncertain about both methods and aims in this area.

This is not the fault of the teachers. The entertainment and information industries must be
drawn into a debate with the educational institutions to determine how best to blend these
new technologies into the classroom.

Many people in our era are drawn to the pessimistic view that the new media are
destroying old skills and eroding critical judgement. It may be true that past generations
were more literate but - taking the pre-19th century meaning of the term - this was true of
only a small section of the population. The word literacy is a 19th-century coinage to
describe the divorce of reading and writing from a full knowledge of literature. The
education reforms of the 19th century produced reading and writing as skills separable
from full participation in the cultural heritage.

The new media now point not only to a futuristic cyber-economy, they also make our
cultural past available to the whole nation. Most children’s access to these treasures is
initially through television. It is doubtful whether our literary heritage has ever been
available to or sought out by more than about 5 per cent of the population; it has certainly
not been available to more than 10 per cent. But the new media joined to the old, through
the public service tradition of British broadcasting, now makes our literary tradition available
to all.

Questions 1-4

Choose the appropriate letters A-D and write them in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.

1. When discussing the debate on literacy in education, the writer notes that

A children cannot read and write as well as they used to.

B academic work has improved over the last 20 years.

C there is evidence that literacy is related to external factors.
D there are opposing arguments that are equally convincing.


2. In the 4th paragraph, the writer’s main point is that

A the printed word is both gaining and losing power.

B all inventions bring disadvantages as well as benefits.

C those who work in manual jobs no longer need to read.

D the media offers the best careers for those who like writing.


3. According to the writer, the main problem that schools face today is

A how best to teach the skills of reading and writing.

B how best to incorporate technology into classroom teaching.

C finding the means to purchase technological equipment.

D managing the widely differing levels of literacy amongst pupils.


4. At the end of the article, the writer is suggesting that

A literature and culture cannot be divorced.
B the term ‘literacy’ has not been very useful.

C 10 per cent of the population never read literature.

D our exposure to cultural information is likely to increase.

-------------------------------

Tip

- The questions follow the order of information in the passage.
- Read the first question and the four options A-D. One of these completes the
statement so that it expresses an idea that is also given in the passage.
- Decide whether the question focuses on a detail in the passage or a main idea.
- Note the key words in the question. These will help you locate the area of the passage
where you will find the answer.
- Read this part of the passage very carefully. You will find that some of the vocabulary
in options A-D also occurs in the passage but only one of the options will complete the
sentence correctly.


Questions 5-10

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage 2?

In boxes 5-10 on your answer sheet write

YES if the statement agrees with the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

5..................... It is not as easy to analyse literacy levels as it used to be.
6..................... Our literacy skills need to be as highly developed as they were in the
past.
7..................... Illiteracy is on the increase.

8..................... Professional writers earn relatively more than they used to.

9..................... A good literacy level is important for those who work in television.

10..................... Computers are having a negative impact on literacy in schools

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tip

Questions 5-10 test your understanding of what the writer believes; i.e. his/her views or
opinions. There are three choices: Yes - the writer believes this; No - the writer believes the
opposite of this; Not Given - the writer doesn't give any views on this.

- The questions follow the order of information in the passage.
- Start with the first question and note the key words.
- Skim or scan the passage until you come to the part where the writer is discussing
his/her views on the topic or idea presented in the question. If you cannot find any
information on this, the answer may be 'not given'. Check this carefully.

• If you do find some information, decide whether the writer's views are the same or the
opposite of those given in the question.


Questions 11-13

Complete the sentences below with words taken from Reading Passage 2.
Write your answers in boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet.

Use NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.


In Renaissance England, the best readers were those able to read 11.....................

The writer uses the example of 12..................... to illustrate the general fall in certain
areas of literacy.

It has been shown that after leaving school, the only things that a lot of people write are
13...................../


Tip

-The questions follow the order of information in the passage.
-Check the instructions: you can use a maximum of three words for each answer and
these words must be taken from the reading passage. If you use more than three words
or words that are not in the passage, the answer will be marked wrong.
-Read the sentences and underline the key words.
-Read the words around each gap carefully. See if you can predict the answer or the
kind of word(s) that you are looking for.
-Scan or skim the passage until you come to the part that is relevant.
-Re-read the sentence with the word you have chosen for the gap to check that it makes
sense both grammatically and in terms of meaning.

Solution:

1. 14 C 15 A 16
8. YES
B 17 D
2. A 9. YES
3. B 10. NO
4. D 11. manuscript

5. YES 12. (tabloid) newspapers

6. NO 13. shopping lists
7. NOT GIVEN
