TITLE: Reducing electricity consumption on the Isle of Eigg
INDEX: 359
============================================================

Reducing electricity consumption on the Isle of Eigg

Background

The Isle of Eigg is situated off the West Coast of Scotland, and is reached by ferry from the
mainland. For the island community of about a hundred residents, it has always been
expensive to import products, materials and skilled labour from the mainland, and this has
encouraged a culture of self-sufficiency and careful use of resources. Today, although the
island now has most modem conveniences, CO2 emissions per household are 20 percent
lower than the UK average, and electricity use is 50 percent lower.

When Eigg designed its electricity grid, which was switched on in February 2008, it quickly
became apparent that in order to keep the capital building costs down, it would be
necessary to manage demand. This would also allow the island to generate most of its
electricity from renewable sources, mainly water, wind and solar power. This goal was
overseen by the Eigg Heritage Trust (EHT).

The technology


Eigg manages electricity demand mainly by capping the instantaneous power that can be
used to five kilowatts (kW) for a household and ten kW for a business. If usage goes over
the limit, the electricity supply is cut off and the maintenance team must be called to come
and switch it back on again. All households and businesses have energy monitors, which
display current and cumulative electricity usage, and sound an alarm when consumption
reaches a user-defined level, usually set a few hundred watts below the actual limit. The
result is that Eigg residents have a keen sense of how much power different electrical
appliances use, and are careful to minimise energy consumption.

Demand is also managed by warning the entire island when renewable energy generation
is lower than demand, and diesel generators are operating to back it up - a so-called ‘red
light day’, as opposed to ‘green light days’ when there is sufficient renewable energy.
Residents then take steps to temporarily reduce electricity demand further still, or postpone
demand until renewable energy generation has increased.

Energy use on the island has also been reduced through improved wall and loft insulation
in homes, new boilers, solar water heating, carsharing and various small, energy-saving
measures in households. New energy supplies are being developed, including sustainably
harvested forests to supply wood for heating.
Eigg Heritage Trust has installed insulation in all of its own properties at no cost to the
tenants, while private properties have paid for their own insulation to be installed. The
same applies for installations of solar water heating, although not all Trust properties have
received this as yet. The Trust also operates a Green Grants scheme, where residents can
claim 50 percent of the cost of equipment to reduce carbon emissions, up to a limit of £300.
Purchases included bikes, solar water heating, secondary glazing, thicker curtains, and
greenhouses to grow food locally, rather than importing it.

Environmental benefits
Prior to the installation of the new electricity grid and renewable energy generation, most
households on Eigg used-diesel generators to supply electricity, resulting in significant
carbon emissions. Homes were also poorly insulated and had old, inefficient oil-burning
boilers, or used coal for heating.

The work by the Eigg Heritage Trust to reduce energy use has resulted in significant
reductions in carbon emissions from the island’s households and businesses. The average
annual electricity use per household is just 2,160 kilowatt hours (kWh), compared to a UK
average in 2008 of 4,198 kWh. Domestic carbon emissions have fallen by 47 percent, from
8.4 to 4.45 tonnes per year. This compares to average UK household emissions of 5.5 to 6
tonnes per year. The emissions should fall even further over the next few years as the
supply of wood for heating increases.

Social benefits

The completion of Eigg’s electricity grid has made a significant difference to the island’s
residents, freeing them from dependence on diesel generators and providing them with a
stable and affordable power supply. A reliable electricity supply has brought improvements
in other areas, for example, better treatment of drinking water in some houses, and the
elimination of the constant noise of diesel generators. Improved home insulation and
heating has also yielded benefits, making it more affordable to keep homes at a
comfortable temperature. One of the incentives for capping electricity use, rather than
charging different amounts according to usage, was to make access to energy equitable.
Every household has the same five kW cap, irrespective of income, so distributing the
available resources equally across the island’s population.
Economic and employment benefits

Eigg’s electricity grid supports four part-time maintenance jobs on the island, and residents
have also been employed for building work to improve Trust-owned houses and other
buildings. Likewise, the start of organised harvesting of wood for heating has created
several forestry jobs for residents. A part-time ‘green project manager’ post has also been
created. A wider economic impact has come from having a reliable and affordable
electricity supply, which has enabled several new businesses to start up, including
restaurants, shops, guest houses and self-catering accommodation. As Eigg has become
known for cutting carbon emissions and protecting the environment, an increasing number
of visitors have come to the island to learn about its work, bringing a further economic
benefit to the residents.

Questions 1-7

Answer the questions below.

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER from the passage for each
answer.

1 Approximately how many people live on Eigg? 1.....................

2 What proportion of a UK household’s electricity consumption does an Eigg
household consume? 2.....................

3 Apart from wind and sun, where does most of Eigg’s electricity come from?
3.....................

4 What device measures the amount of electricity Eigg’s households are using?
4.....................

5 When renewable energy supplies are insufficient, what backs them up?
5.....................

6 What has EHT provided free of charge in all the houses it owns? 6.....................

7 Which gardening aid did some Eigg inhabitants claim grants for? 7.....................


Questions 8-13

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage? Write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this


8..................... Electricity was available for the first time on Eigg when a new grid
was switched on.

9..................... Eigg’s carbon emissions are now much lower than before.

10..................... Wood will soon be the main source of heating on Eigg.

11..................... Eigg is quieter as a result of having a new electricity supply.

12..................... Well-off households pay higher prices for the use of extra
electricity.

13..................... The new electricity grid has created additional employment
opportunities on Eigg.

Solution:

1. 100 8. FALSE
2. 50% 9. TRUE

10. NOT
3. water
GIVEN
4. energy monitors 11. TRUE
5. diesel generators 12. FALSE

6. insulation 13. TRUE
7. greenhouses
