TITLE: Remains of the pterosaur, a cousin of the dinosaur, are
INDEX: 362
============================================================

Remains of the pterosaur, a cousin of the dinosaur, are
found on every continent. Richard Monastersky reports
PTEROSAURS


Remains of the pterosaur, a cousin of the dinosaur, are found on every continent.
Richard Monastersky reports
Pterosaurs stand out as one of nature's great success stories. The Pterosaur: a flying reptile that lived
They first appeared during the Triassic period, 215 million years during the time of the dinosaur
ago, and thrived for 150 million years before becoming extinct at A different but equally impressive sight is
the end of the Cretaceous period. Uncontested in the air, the life-size model of Quetzalcoatlus
pterosaurs colonised all continents and evolved into a vast array of northropi, which stares down at visitors in
shapes and sizes. the Museum of Flying in Santa Monica,
Until recently, most scientists would not have put pterosaurs in the California. It has a beak the size of a
same class as birds in terms of flying ability. Because pterosaurs man and wings wider than those of many
were reptiles, generations of researchers imagined that these of the planes exhibited nearby. This
creatures must have been cold-blooded, like modern snakes and pterosaur had wings over 11 metres
lizards. This would have made flying awkward, as they would have wide, making it the largest flying animal
lacked the endurance to power their muscles for long periods of ever known.
time. Quetzalcoatlus represents the height of
In the past three decades, however, a number of fossil* discoveries pterosaur evolution. 'Unlike smaller
have prompted researchers to re-examine their views. The new pterosaurs, it could use natural currents
picture of pterosaurs reveals that they were unlike any modern to stay in the air without having to move
reptile. From a fossil discovered in Kazakhstan, scientists suspect its wings continuously,' said Paul
that pterosaurs had a covering resembling fur. If so, this detail MacCready, an aeronautical engineer.

provides evidence of a warm-blooded body that could maintain the 'As pterosaurs got larger, they
kind of effort needed to stay in the air. Indeed, scientists now discovered the benefits of gliding on air
believe that many pterosaurs were gifted air¬borne predators, built currents, making use of a free energy
to feed while in flight. And, in fact, such controversy has source. With their hollow bones, these
surrounded pterosaurs since the first discovery of one in the early pterosaurs had a very light construction,
1700s. ideal for such activity.'
Cosimo Alessandro Collini, the first natural historian to study the As we walked beneath the
fossil and describe it, was unable to classify it. It was not until 1791 Quetzalcoatlus model in Santa Monica,
that the great French anatomist Georges Cuvier deduced that the MacCready pointed out its similarity to
animal was in fact a flying reptile, whose fourth finger supported a sailplanes, the most efficient kind of
wing. He named the fossil Pterodactylus, combining the Greek aeroplanes. Both have long slender
words for wing and finger. A few decades later, the name wings designed to fly with minimum
pterosaur, or winged reptile, was adopted to describe the growing power. During flight, sailplane pilots
list of similar fossiIs. routinely search for places where heat
In 1873, a remarkable pterosaur specimen came to light that
rises from sun-baked earth, creating hot
confirmed Cuvier's deduction. Unlike earlier fossils, this new find
air currents called thermals.
near the Bavarian town of Solnhofen contained delicate wing
Undoubtedly, Quetzalcoatlus would have
impressions, establishing definitely that the extinct reptile was
used thermals as well, lazily circling over
capable of flight. Even though over a thousand pterosaur
the river deltas that once covered parts
specimens are known today, such wing impressions remain rare.
of Texas.
Normally only bones survive the fossilisation process. The triumphant reign of pterosaurs
But how pterosaurs learnt to fly remains a matter for disagreement.
ended with this giant flier. At the end of
Most researchers conclude that pterosaurs are descended from a
small tree-dwelling reptile that spent its life jumping between
branches. This creature would have spread its limbs, and used
flaps of skin attached to its limbs and body to help it to land gently
on the ground. Over many generations the fourth finger on each of
its front 'arms' would have grown longer, making the skin surface
larger and enabling the animal to glide farther. Meanwhile, the the Cretaceous period 65 million years
competing argument holds that pterosaurs developed from two- ago, a meteorite or comet slammed into
legged reptiles that ran along the ground, perhaps spreading their the Earth. That calamity - and other
arms for balance. Through gradual growth, the front arms would events-wiped out roughly three quarters
then have evolved into wings. This difficult issue will only be of all species, including all pterosaurs
resolved with the discovery of earlier forms of pterosaurs. and dinosaurs. But before their
'It's very difficult to say how pterosaurs changed over time because disappearance, pterosaurs enjoyed
the earliest fossils we have are of pterosaurs whose fourth finger unequalled success. They flew into
has already transformed into a wing,' says Fabio dalla Vecchia, an sunny skies before any other vertebrate.
Italian researcher. In fact, the earliest known pterosaurs came from For 150 million years they sailed the
the mountains of northern Italy, where he has spent years winds on the strength of a fragile finger.

searching for flying reptiles. These species have shorter wings than What a glorious ride they had.
later forms, but there is evidence that they were skilful fliers,
capable of catching fish over open water. Proof of this has been
found in the fossil of a Eudimorphodon, a 215-million-year-old
pterosaur found near Bergamo, Italy. Under a microscope, several
fish scales can be seen in the abdomen of the specimen -the
remains of the pterosaur's last meal.

Questions 28-34

SECTION 3 Question 28-40
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 28-40, which are based on Reading
Passage 3.


Questions 28-34

Reading Passage 3 has eleven paragraphs, A-K.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter, A-K, in boxes 28-34 on your answer sheet.
28..................... similarities between pterosaurs and mechanical flight

29..................... the identification of the type of creature a pterosaur actually was
30..................... conflicting theories about how pterosaurs came to fly
31..................... the cause of widespread destruction of animal life on our planet
32..................... the fact that pterosaurs once existed all over the world
33..................... the first clear proof that pterosaurs could fly
34..................... concrete evidence that pterosaurs hunted their food from the air


Questions 35-38


Questions 35-38

Look at the following statements (Questions 35-38) and the list of people below.

Match each statement with the correct person, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter, A, B, C or D, in boxes 35-38 on your answer sheet.
35..................... He refers to the difficulty of determining how pterosaurs evolved without
further evidence.
36..................... He failed to interpret the evidence before him.
37..................... He gave an appropriate name to the first pterosaur that was discovered.
38..................... He mentions the ability of pterosaurs to take advantage of their
environment.

List of People

A Cosimo Alessandro Collini
B Georges Cuvier
C Fabio dalla Vecchia
D Paul MacCready


Questions 39 and 40

Questions 39 and 40
Answer the questions below.

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER from the Reading
Passage 3 for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 39 and 40 on your answer sheet.

39 So far, evidence of a total of 39..................... pterosaurs has been discovered.
40 The wings of Quetzalcoatlus measured more than 40..................... across.

Solution:

1. J 8. C
2. D 9. A

3. F 10. B
4. K 11. D

5. A 12. over a thousand
6. E 13. 11 metres

7. G
