TITLE: Running on empty
INDEX: 374
============================================================

Running on empty

A revolutionary new theory in sports physiology.

A For almost a century, scientists have presumed, not unreasonably, that fatigue - or
exhaustion in athletes originates in the muscles. Precise explanations have varied
but all have been based on the ‘limitations theory’. In other words, muscles tire
because they hit a physical limit: they either run out of fuel or oxygen or they drown
in toxic by-products.

B In the past few years, however, Timothy Noakes and Alan St Clair Gibson from the
University of Cape Town, South Africa, have examined this standard theory. The
deeper they dig, the more convinced they have become that physical fatigue simply
isn't the same as a car running out of petrol. Fatigue, they argue, is caused not by
distress signals springing from overtaxed muscles, but is an emotional response which
begins in the brain. The essence of their new theory is that the brain, using a mix of
physiological, subconscious and conscious cues, paces the muscles to keep them well
back from the brink of exhaustion. When the brain decides its time to quit, it creates the
distressing sensations we interpret as unbearable muscle fatigue. This ‘central governor*
theory remains controversial, but it does explain many puzzling aspects of athletic
performance.

C A recent discovery that Noakes calls the ‘lactic acid paradox' made him start
researching this area seriously. Lactic acid is a by-product of exercise, and its
accumulation is often cited as a cause of fatigue. But when research subjects
exercise in conditions simulating high altitude, they become fatigued even though
lactic acid levels remain low. Nor has the oxygen content of their blood fallen too
low for them to keep going. Obviously, Noakes deduced, something else was making
them tire before they hit either of these physiological limits.

D Probing further, Noakes conducted an experiment with seven cyclists who had
sensors taped to their legs to measure the nerve impulses travelling through their
muscles. It has long been known that during exercise, the body never uses 100% of
the available muscle fibres in a single contraction. The amount used varies, but in
endurance tasks such as this cycling test the body calls on about 30%.

E Noakes reasoned that if the limitations theory was correct and fatigue was due to
muscle fibres hitting some limit, the number of fibres used for each pedal stroke
should increase as the fibres tired and the cyclist’s body attempted to compensate
by recruiting an ever-larger proportion of the total. But his team found exactly the
opposite. As fatigue set in, the electrical activity in the cyclists' legs declined - even
during sprinting, when they were striving to cycle as fast as they could.

F To Noakes, this was strong evidence that the old theory was wrong. ‘The cyclists
may have felt completely exhausted,’ he says, ‘but their bodies actually had
considerable reserves that they could theoretically tap by using a greater proportion
of the resting fibres.’ This, he believes, is proof that the brain is regulating the pace
of the workout to hold the cyclists well back from the point of catastrophic
exhaustion.
G More evidence comes from the fact that fatigued muscles don’t actually run out of
anything critical. Levels of glycogen, which is the muscles’ primary fuel, and ATP.
the chemical they use for temporary energy storage, decline with exercise but never
bottom out. Even at the end of a marathon, ATP levels are 80-90% of the resting
norm, and glycogen levels never get to zero.

H Further support for the central regulator comes from the fact that top athletes
usually manage to go their fastest at the end of a race, even though, theoretically,
that's when their muscles should be closest to exhaustion. But Noakes believes the
end spurt makes no sense if fatigue is caused by muscles poisoning themselves
with lactic acid as this would cause racers to slow down rather than enable them to
sprint for the finish line. In the new theory, the explanation is obvious. Knowing the
end is near, the brain slightly relaxes its vigil, allowing the athlete to tap some of the
body’s carefully hoarded reserves.

I But the central governor theory does not mean that what's happening in the muscles is
irrelevant. The governor constantly monitors physiological signals from the muscles, along
with other information, to set the level of fatigue. A large number of signals are probably
involved but, unlike the limitations theory, the central governor theory suggests that these
physiological factors are not the direct determinants of fatigue, but simply information to
take into account.

J Conscious factors can also intervene. Noakes believes that the central regulator
evaluates the planned workout, and sets a pacing strategy accordingly. Experienced
runners know that if they set out on a 10-kilometre run. the first kilometre feels
easier than the first kilometre of a 5-kilometre run, even though there should be no
difference. That, Noakes says, is because the central governor knows you have
farther to go in the longer run and has programmed itself to dole out fatigue
symptoms accordingly.

K St Clair Gibson believes there is a good reason why our bodies arc designed to
keep something back. That way, there's always something left in the tank for an
emergency. In ancient times, and still today, life would be too dangerous if our
bodies allowed us to become so tired that we couldn't move quickly when faced with
an unexpected need.

Questions 1-6

Reading Passage 3 has eleven paragraphs A-K.

Choose the correct heading for Paragraphs A-F from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number (i-viii) in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.


List of headings
i Avoiding tiredness in athletes
ii Puzzling evidence raises a question
iii Traditional explanations
iv Interpreting the findings
v Developing muscle fibres
vi A new hypothesis
vii Description of a new test
viii Surprising results in an endurance test

1..................... Paragraph A

2..................... Paragraph B

3..................... Paragraph C

4..................... Paragraph D

5..................... Paragraph E

6..................... Paragraph F


Questions 7-13

Classify the following ideas as relating to


A the Limitations Theory

B the Central Governor Theory

C both the Limitations Theory and the Central Governor Theory


Write the correct letter A, B or C in boxes 7-13 on your answer sheet.
NB: You may use any letter more than once.

7..................... Lactic acid is produced in muscles during exercise.

8..................... Athletes can keep going until they use up all their available resources.

9..................... Mental processes control the symptoms of tiredness.

10..................... The physiological signals from an athlete's muscles are linked to fatigue.
11..................... The brain plans and regulates muscle performance in advance of a run.

12..................... Athletes' performance during a race may be affected by lactic acid build-
up.

13..................... Humans are genetically programmed to keep some energy reserves.

Solution:

1. iii 8. A
2. vi 9. B

3. ii 10. C
4. vii 11. B

5. viii 12. A
6. iv 13. B

7. C
