TITLE: Rural transport plan of “Practical action”
INDEX: 375
============================================================

Rural transport plan of “Practical action”

For more than 40 years, Practical Action has worked with poor communities to identify the
types of transport that work best, taking into consideration culture, needs and skills. With
our technical and practical support, isolated rural communities can design, build and
maintain their own solutions.

A


Whilst the focus of National Development Plans in the transport sector lies heavily in the
areas of extending road networks and bridges, there are still major gaps identified in
addressing the needs of poorer communities. There is a need to develop and promote the
sustainable use of alternative transport systems and intermediate means of transportation
(IMTs) that complement the linkages of poor people with road networks and other socio-
economic infrastructures to improve their livelihoods.


B

On the other hand, the development of all weathered roads (only 30 percent of the rural
population have access to this so far) and motorable bridges are very costly for a country
with a small and stagnant economy. In addition, these interventions are not always
favourable in all geographical contexts environmentally, socially and economically. More
than 60 percent of the network is concentrated in the lowland areas of the country.
Although there are a number of alternative ways by which transportation and mobility
needs of rural communities in the hills can be addressed, a lack of clear government focus
and policies, lack of fiscal and economic incentives, lack of adequate technical knowledge
and manufacturing capacities have led to under-development of this alternative transport
sub-sector including the provision of IMTs.

C

One of the major causes of poverty is isolation. Improving the access and mobility of the
isolated poor paves the way for access to markets, services and opportunities. By
improving transport poorer people are able to access markets where they can buy or sell
goods for income, and make better use of essential services such as health and education.
No proper roads or vehicles mean women and children are forced to spend many hours
each day attending to their most basic needs, such as collecting water and firewood. This
valuable time could be used to tend crops, care for the family, study or develop small
business ideas to generate much-needed income.

Road building

D

Without roads, rural communities are extremely restricted. Collecting water and firewood,
and going to local markets is a huge task, therefore it is understandable that the
construction of roads is a major priority for many rural communities. Practical Action is
helping to improve rural access/transport infrastructures through the construction and
rehabilitation of short rural roads, small bridges, culverts and other transport-related
functions. The aim is to use methods that encourage community-driven development. This
means villagers can improve their own lives through better access to markets, health care,
education and other economic and social opportunities, as well as bringing improved
services and supplies to the now-accessible villages.

Driving forward new ideas

E

Practical Action and the communities we work with are constantly crafting and honing new
ideas to help poor people. Cycle trailers have practical business use too, helping people
carry their goods, such as vegetables and charcoal, to markets for sale. Not only that, but
those on the poverty-line can earn a decent income by making, maintaining and operating
bicycle taxis. With Practical Action’s know-how, Sri Lanka communities have been able to
start a bus service and maintain the roads along which it travels. The impact has been
remarkable. This service has put an end to rural people’s social isolation. Quick and
affordable, it gives them a reliable way to travel to the nearest town; and now their children
can get an education, making it far more likely they’ll find a path out of poverty. Practical
Action is also an active member of many national and regional networks through which
exchange of knowledge and advocating based on action research are carried out and one
conspicuous example is the Lanka Organic Agriculture Movement.

Sky-scraping transport system

F

For people who live in remote, mountainous areas, getting food to market in order to earn
enough money to survive is a serious issue. The hills are so steep that travelling down
them is dangerous. A porter can help but they are expensive, and it would still take hours
or even a day. The journey can take so long that their goods start to perish and become
worthless and less. Practical Action has developed an ingenious solution called an aerial
ropeway. It can either operate by gravitation force or with the use of external power. The
ropeway consists of two trolleys rolling over support tracks connected to a control cable in
the middle which moves in a traditional flywheel system. The trolley at the top is loaded
with goods and can take up to 120kg. This is pulled down to the station at the bottom,
either by the force of gravity or by an external power. The other trolley at the bottom is,
therefore, pulled upwards automatically. The external power can be produced by a micro-
hydro system if access to an electricity grid is not an option.

Bringing people on board

G

Practical Action developed a two-wheeled iron trailer that can be attached (via a hitch
behind the seat) to a bicycle and be used to carry heavy loads (up to around 200 kgs) of
food, water or even passengers. People can now carry three times as much as before and
still pedal the bicycle. The cycle trailers are used for transporting goods by local producers,
as ambulances, as mobile shops, and even as mobile libraries. They are made in small
village workshops from iron tubing, which is cut, bent, welded and drilled to make the frame
and wheels. Modifications are also carried out to the trailers in these workshops at the
request of the buyers. The two-wheeled ‘ambulance’ is made from moulded metal, with
standard rubber-tyred wheels. The “bed” section can be padded with cushions to make the
patient comfortable, while the “seat” section allows a family member to attend to the patient
during transit. A dedicated bicycle is needed to pull the ambulance trailer, so that other
community members do not need to go without the bicycles they depend on in their daily
lives. A joining mechanism allows for easy removal and attachment. In response to user
comments, a cover has been designed that can be added to give protection to the patient
and attendant in poor weather. Made of treated cotton, the cover is durable and waterproof.

Questions 1-4

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage ?

In boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement is true

NO if the statement is false

NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage


1..................... A slow-developing economy often can not afford some road networks,
especially for those used regardless of weather conditions.


2..................... Rural communities’ officials know how to improve alternative transport
technically.


3..................... The primary aim for Practical Action to improve rural transport
infrastructures is meant to increase the trade among villages.

4..................... Lanka Organic Agriculture Movement provided service that Practical Action
highly involved in.


Questions 5-8

Answer the questions below.

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER from the passage for
each answer.


5 What is the first duty for many rural communities to reach unrestricted development?
5.....................

6 What was one of the new ideas to help poor people carry their goods, such as
vegetables and charcoal, to markets for sale? 6.....................

7 What service has put an end to rural people’s social isolation in Sri Lanka?
7.....................

8 What solution had been applied for people who live in remote mountainous areas
getting food to market? 8.....................


Questions 9-13

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage.
Using NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.


Write your answers in boxes 9-13 on your answer sheet.

Besides normal transport task, changes are also implemented to the trailers in these
workshops at the request of the buyers when it was used on a medical emergency or a
moveable 9.....................; ‘Ambulance’ is made from metal, with rubber wheels and drive-
by another bicycle. When put with 10..................... in the two-wheeled ‘ambulance’, the
patient can stay comfortable and which another 11...................... can sit on caring for the
patient in transport journey. In order to dismantle or attach other equipment, and
assembling 12..................... is designed. Later, as users suggest, 13..................... has also
been added to give protection to the patient.

Solution:

1. YES 8. aerial ropeway
2. NO 9. shops

3. NOT GIVEN 10. cushions
4. YES 11. family member

5. construction of
12. mechanism
roads
6. cycle trailers 13. a cover
7. a bus service
