TITLE: Sand Dunes
INDEX: 376
============================================================

Sand Dunes

A

One of the main problems posed by sand dunes is their encroachment on human habitats.
Sand dunes move by different means, all of them aided by the wind. Sand dunes threaten
buildings and crops in Africa, the Middle East, and China. Preventing sand dunes from
overwhelming cities and agricultural areas has become a priority for the United Nations
Environment Program. On the other hand, dune habitats provide niches for highly
specialized plants and animals, including numerous rare and endangered species.

B

Sand is usually composed of hard minerals such as quartz that cannot be broken down into
silt or clay. Yellow, brown and reddish shades of sand indicate their presence of iron
compounds. Red sand is composed of quartz coated by a layer of iron oxide. White sands
are nearly pure gypsum. Sand with a high percentage of silicate can be used in
glassmaking. Sandstone is created by sand, mixed with lime, chalk or some other material
that acts as a binding agent, that is deposited in layers at the bottom of a sea or other area
and pressed together into rock by the great pressure of sediments that are deposited on
top of it over thousands or millions of years.

C

The most common dune form on Earth and on Mars is crescentic. Crescent-shaped
mounds are generally wider than they are long. The slipfaces are on the concave sides of
the dunes. These dunes form under winds that blow consistently from one direction, and
they also are known as barchans or transverse dunes. Some types of crescentic dunes
move more quickly over desert surfaces than any other type of dune. A group of dunes
moved more than 100 metres per year between 1954 and 1959 the China’s Ningxia
Province, and similar speeds have been recorded in the Western Desert of Egypt. The
largest crescentic dunes on Earth, with mean crest-to-crest widths of more than 3
kilometres, are in China’s Taklamakan Desert.

D

Radially symmetrical, star dunes are pyramidal sand mounds with slipfaces on there or
more arms that radiate from the high center of the mound. They tend to accumulate in
areas with multidirectional wind regimes. Star dunes grow upward rather than laterally.

They dominate the Grand Erg Oriental of the Sahara. In other deserts, they occur around
the margins of the sand seas, particularly near topographic barriers. In the southeast
Badain Jaran Desert of China, the star dunes are up to 500 metres tall and may be the
tallest dunes on Earth. Straight or slightly sinuous sand ridges typically much longer than
they are wide are known as linear dunes. They may be more than 160 kilometres (99 mi)
long. Some linear dunes merge to form Y-shaped compound dunes. Many forms in
bidirectional wind regimes. The long axes of these dunes extend in the resultant direction
of sand movement. Linear loess hills known as pahas are superficially similar.

E

Once sand begins to pile up, ripples and dunes can form. Wind continues to move sand up
to the top of the pile until the pile is so steep that it collapses under its own weight. The
collapsing sand comes to rest when it reaches just the right steepness to keep the dune
stable. This angle, usually about 30-34°, is called the angle of repose. Every pile of loose
particles has a unique angle of repose, depending upon the properties of the material it’s
made of, such as the grain size and roundness. Ripples grow into dunes with the increase
of wind and sand input.
F

The repeating cycle of sand inching up the windward side to the dune crest, then slipping
down the dune’s slip face allows the dune to inch forward, migrating in the direction the
wind blows. As you might guess, all of this climbing then slipping leaves its mark on the
internal structure of the dune. The image on the right shows fossil sand dune structure
preserved in the Merced Formation at Fort Funston, Golden Gate National Recreation
Area. The sloping lines or laminations you see are the preserved slip faces of a migrating
sand dune. This structure is called cross-bedding and can be the result of either wind or
water currents. The larger the cross-bedded structure, however, the more likely it is to be
formed by wind, rather than water.

G

Sand dunes can “sing” at a level up to 115 decibels and generate sounds in different notes.
The dunes at Sand Mountain n Nevada usually sing in a low C but can also sing in B and C
sharp. The La Mar de Dunas in Chile hum in F while those at the Ghord Lahmar in
Morocco howl in G sharp. The sounds are produced by avalanches of sand generated by
blowing winds. For a while, it was thought that the avalanches caused the entire dune to
resonate like a flute or violin but if that were true then different size dunes would produce
different notes. In the mid 2000s, American, French and Moroccan scientists visiting sand
dunes in Morocco, Chile, China and Oman published a paper in the Physical Review
Letters that determined the sounds were produced by collisions between grains of sand
that caused the motions of the grains to become synchronized, causing the outer layer of a
dune to vibrate like the cone of a loudspeaker, producing sound. The tone of the sounds
depended primarily on the size of the grains.

H

Scientists performed a computer simulation on patterns and dynamics of desert dunes in
laboratory. Dune patterns observed in deserts were reproduced. From the initial random
state, stars and linear dunes are produced, depending on the variability of the wind
direction. The efficiency in sand transport is calculated through the course of development.
Scientists found that the sand transport is the most efficient in the linear transverse dune.
The efficiency in sand transport always increased through the evolution, and the way it
increases was stepwise. They also found that the shadow zone, the region where the sand
wastes the chance to move, shrinks through the course of evolution, which greatly helps
them build a model to simulate a sand move.

Questions 1-8

Choose the correct heading for paragraphs A-H from the list below.

Write the correct number, i-x, in boxes 1-8 on your answer sheet.

List of Headings
i potential threat to buildings and crops despite of benefit.

ii the cycle of sand moving forward with wind
iii protection method in various countries.

iv scientists simulate sand move and build model in lab
v sand composition explanation
vi singing sand dunes
vii other types of sand dunes
viii the personal opinion on related issues.

ix reasons why sand dunes form
x the most common sand type


1..................... Paragraph A

2..................... Paragraph B

3..................... Paragraph C

4..................... Paragraph D

5..................... Paragraph E

6..................... Paragraph F

7..................... Paragraph G
8..................... Paragraph H


Questions 9-10

Answer the questions 9-10 and choose correct letter A, B, C or D.


9. What is the main composition of white sand made of according to the passage?

A Quartz

B Gypsum
C Lime

D Iron


10. Which one is not mentioned as a sand type in this passage?

A Linear
B Crescentic

C Overlap

D Star


Questions 11-14

Complete the summary using the list of words, A-J below.

Write the correct letter, A-J in boxes 11-14 on your answer sheet.


Crescentic is an ordinary 11..................... on both Earth and Mars, apart from which, there
are also other types of sand dunes. Different color of the sand reflects different
components, some of them are rich in 12..................... that can not be easily broken into
clay. Sand dunes can “sing” at a level up to 115 decibels and generate sounds in different
notes. Sand dunes can be able to 13..................... at a certain level of sound intensity, and
the different size of grains creates different 14..................... of the sounds.
A quartz B shape C pressure

D tone E protection F category

G minerals H sing I lab

J direction

Solution:

1. i 8. iv
2. v 9. B

3. x 10. C
4. vii 11. B

5. ix 12. G
6. ii 13. H

7. vi 14. D
