TITLE: Science and the Stradivarius:Uncovering the secret of
INDEX: 381
============================================================

Science and the Stradivarius:Uncovering the secret of
quality

A. Violins made by long-dead Italian craftsmen from the Cremona region are beautiful
works of art, coveted by collectors as well as players. Particularly outstanding violins
have reputedly changed hands for over a million pounds. In contrast, fine modern
instruments can be bought for under £100. Do such figures really reflect such large
differences in quality? After more than a hundred years of vigorous debate, this
question remains highly contentious, provoking strongly held but divergent views
among musicians, violin makers and scientists alike.
B. Every violin, whether a Stradivarius or the cheapest factory- made copy, has a
distinctive 'voice’ of its 0. Just as any musician can immediately recognise the
difference between Domingo and Pavarotti singing the same operatic aria, so a
skilled violinist can distinguish between different qualities in the sound produced by
individual Stradivari or Guarneri violins. Individual notes on a single instrument sound
different each time they are played, which suggests that the perceived tone of a violin
must be related to the overall design of the instrument, rather than the frequencies of
particular resonances on it. But although various attempts have been made to
analyse such global properties, it is extremely difficult to distinguish between a fine
Stradivarius instrument and an indifferent modern copy on the basis of the measured
response alone. The ear is a supreme detection device, and a system has yet to be
developed which can match the brain's sophisticated ability to assess complex
sounds.
C. So how do skilled violinmakers optimise the tone of an instrument during the
construction process? They begin by selecting a wood of the highest possible quality
for the front and back plates (or parts of the violin), which they test by tapping with a
hammer and judging how well it 'rings’. The next important step is to skillfully carve
the plates out of the solid wood, taking great care to get the right degree of arching
and variations in thickness. Traditional makers optimise the thickness by testing the

‘feel’ of the plates when they are flexed, and by the sounds produced when they are
tapped at different positions with the knuckles.
D. However, in the last 50 years or so a group of violin makers has emerged who
have tried to take a more overtly scientific approach to violin making. One common
practice they have adopted is to replace the traditional flexing and tapping of plates
by controlled measurements. During the carving process, the thinned plates are
sprinkled with flakes of glitter and suspended horizontally above a loudspeaker. The
glitter forms a pattern each time the loudspeaker excites a resonance. The aim is to
interactively 'tune' these first few free plate resonances to specified patterns.
E. Unfortunately, there are very few examples of such measurements for really
fine Italian instruments because their owners are naturally reluctant to allow their
violins to be taken apart for the sake of science. The few tests that have been
performed suggest that the first Italian makers may have tuned the resonant modes
of the individual plates - which they could identify as they tapped them - to exact
musical intervals. This would be consistent with the prevailing Renaissance view of
’perfection1, which was measured in terms of numbers and exact ratios. However,
there is no historical data to support this case.
F. Another factor that affects sound quality is the presence of moisture. To
achieve the quality of “vibrancy” in a violin requires high-quality wood with low internal
damping. By measuring the pattern of growth-rings in the wood of a Stradivarius, we
know that the Italian violin makers sometimes used planks of wood that had only
been seasoned for five years. However, such wood is now 300 years old, and the
intrinsic internal damping will almost certainly have decreased with time. The age of
the wood may therefore automatically contribute to the improved quality of older
instruments. This may also explain why the quality of a modern instrument appears to
improve in its first few years.
G. Another factor thought to account for sound quality is the nature of the varnish
used to protect the instrument. One of the most popular theories for well over a
century to account for the Stradivarius secret has been that the varnish had some
sort of 'magic' composition. However, historical research has shown that it was very
similar to the varnish used today. So apart from the possibility that the Italian varnish
was contaminated with the wings of passing insects and debris from the workshop
floor, there is no convincing evidence to support the idea of a secret formula.

H. Other researchers, meanwhile, have claimed that Stradivarius's secret was to
soak the timber in water, to leach out supposedly harmful chemicals, before it was
seasoned. Although this would be consistent with the idea that the masts and cars of
recently sunken Venetian war galleys might have been used to make violins, other
scientific and historical evidence to support this view is unconvincing.

I. In conclusion, science has not provided any convincing evidence to set
Cremonese instruments apart from the finest violins made by skilled craftsmen today.
Indeed, some leading soloists do occasionally play on modern instruments. However,
the foremost soloists - and, not surprisingly, violin dealers, who have a vested interest
in maintaining the Cremonese legend of intrinsic superiority - remain utterly
unconvinced.

Questions 1-8

Reading Passage has nine paragraphs, A-l

Choose the correct heading for paragraphs A and C-l from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-xi, in boxes 1-8 on your answer sheet.

List of Headings
i An analysis of protective coatings
ii Applying technology to violin production
iii. Location - a key factor
iv A controversial range of prices
v Techniques of mass production
vi The advantages of older wood
vii. A re-evaluation of documentary evidence
viii. The mathematical basis of earlier design
ix Manual woodworking techniques
x Preferences of top musicians
xi. The use of saturated wood
xii. The challenge for scientists

1..................... Paragraph A

2..................... Paragraph C

Example

Paragraph C Vii

3..................... Paragraph D
4..................... Paragraph E

5..................... Paragraph F

6..................... Paragraph G

7..................... Paragraph H

8..................... Paragraph I


Questions 9-13

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?
In boxes 9-13 on your answer sheet, write
TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this


9..................... The quality of any particular note played on the same violin varies.
10..................... Scientific instruments analyse complex sound more accurately
than humans.
11..................... The quality of handmade violins varies according to the musical
ability of the craftsman.
12..................... Modern violins seem to improve in their early years.

13..................... Modern violins are gaining in popularity amongst the top violinists

Solution:

1. iv 8. x
2. ix 9. TRUE

3. ii 10. FALSE
4. viii 11. NOT GIVEN

5. vi 12. TRUE
6. i 13. FALSE

7. xi
