TITLE: Secrets of the Forest
INDEX: 383
============================================================

Secrets of the Forest

A

In 1942 Allan R Holmberg, a doctoral student in anthropology from Yale University, USA,
ventured deep into the jungle of Bolivian Amazonia and searched out an isolated band of
Siriono Indians. The Siriono, Holmberg later wrote, led a "strikingly backward” existence.
Their villages were little more than clusters of thatched huts. Life itself was a perpetual and
punishing search for food: some families grew manioc and other starchy crops in small
garden plots cleared from the forest, while other members of the tribe scoured the country
for small game and promising fish holes. When local resources became depleted, the tribe
moved on.
As for technology, Holmberg noted, the Siriono "may be classified among the most
handicapped peoples of the world". Other than bows, arrows and crude digging sticks, the
only tools the Siriono seemed to possess were "two machetes worn to the size of pocket-
knives".

B

Although the lives of the Siriono have changed in the intervening decades, the image of
them as Stone Age relics has endured. Indeed, in many respects the Siriono epitomize the
popular conception of life in Amazonia. To casual observers, as well as to influential natural
scientists and regional planners, the luxuriant forests of Amazonia seem ageless,
unconquerable, a habitat totally hostile to human civilization. The apparent simplicity of
Indian ways of life has been judged an evolutionary adaptation to forest ecology, living
proof that Amazonia could not - and cannot - sustain a more complex society.
Archaeological traces of far more elaborate cultures have been dismissed as the ruins of
invaders from outside the region, abandoned to decay in the uncompromising tropical
environment.

C

The popular conception of Amazonia and its native residents would be enormously
consequential if it were true. But the human history of Amazonia in the past 11,000 years
betrays that view as myth. Evidence gathered in recent years from anthropology and
archaeology indicates that the region has supported a series of indigenous cultures for
eleven thousand years; an extensive network of complex societies - some with populations
perhaps as large as 100,000 - thrived there for more than 1,000 years before the arrival of
Europeans. (Indeed, some contemporary tribes, including the Siriono, still live among the
earthworks of earlier cultures.) Far from being evolutionarily retarded, prehistoric
Amazonian people developed technologies and cultures that were advanced for their time.
If the lives of Indians today seem "primitive", the appearance is not the result of some
environmental adaptation or ecological barrier; rather it is a comparatively recent
adaptation to centuries of economic and political pressure. Investigators who argue
otherwise have unwittingly projected the present onto the past.

D

The evidence for a revised view of Amazonia will take many people by surprise. Ecologists
have assumed that tropical ecosystems were shaped entirely by natural forces and they
have focused their research on habitats they believe have escaped human influence. But
as the University of Florida ecologist, Peter Feinsinger, has noted, an approach that leaves
people out of the equation is no longer tenable. The archaeological evidence shows that
the natural history of Amazonia is to a surprising extent tied to the activities of its prehistoric
inhabitants.
E

The realization comes none too soon. In June 1992 political and environmental leaders
from across the world met in Rio de Janeiro to discuss how developing countries can
advance their economies without destroying their natural resources. The challenge is
especially difficult in Amazonia. Because the tropical forest has been depicted as
ecologically unfit for large-scale human occupation, some environmentalists have opposed
development of any kind.

Ironically, one major casualty of that extreme position has been the environment itself.
While policy makers struggle to define and implement appropriate legislation, development
of the most destructive kind has continued apace over vast areas.

F

The other major casualty of the "naturalism" of environmental scientists has been the
indigenous Amazonians, whose habits of hunting, fishing, and slash-and-burn cultivation
often have been represented as harmful to the habitat. In the clash between
environmentalists and developers, the Indians, whose presence is in fact crucial to the
survival of the forest, have suffered the most. The new understanding of the pre-history of
Amazonia, however, points toward a middle ground. Archaeology makes clear that with
judicious management selected parts of the region could support more people than anyone
thought before. The long- buried past, it seems, offers hope for the future.

Questions 1-3

Reading Passage 2 has six sections A-F.

Choose the most suitable headings for sections A, B and D from the list of headings below.

Write the appropriate numbers i-vii in boxes 1-3 on your answer sheet.

List of Headings
i Amazonia as unable to sustain complex societies
ii The role of recent technology in ecological research in Amazonia
iii The hostility of the indigenous population to North American influences
iv Recent evidence
v Early research among the Indian Amazons
vi The influence of prehistoric inhabitants on Amazonian natural history
viiThe great difficulty of changing local attitudes and practices


1..................... Section A

2..................... Section B
Example Answer

Paragraph C iv

3..................... Section D


Questions 4-9

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage 2?

In boxes 4-9 on your answer sheet write

YES if the statement agrees with the views of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the views of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

Example
Answer
The prehistoric inhabitants of
NO
Amazonia were relatively
backward in
technological terms.


4..................... The reason for the simplicity of the Indian way of life is that Amazonia has
always been unable to support a more complex society.

5..................... There is a crucial popular misconception about the human history of
Amazonia.

6..................... There are lessons to be learned from similar ecosystems in other parts of
the world.

7..................... Most ecologists were aware that the areas of Amazonia they were working
in had been shaped by human settlement.

8..................... The indigenous Amazonian Indians are necessary to the well-being of the
forest.

9..................... It would be possible for certain parts of Amazonia to support a higher
population.


Questions 10-13

Choose the appropriate letters A-D and write them in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet.


10 In 1942 the US anthropology student concluded that the Siriono

A were unusually aggressive and cruel.
B had had their way of life destroyed by invaders.

C were an extremely primitive society.

D had only recently made permanent settlements.


11 The author believes recent discoveries of the remains of complex societies in Amazonia

A are evidence of early indigenous communities.

B are the remains of settlements by invaders.

C are the ruins of communities established since the European invasions.
D show the region has only relatively recently been covered by forest.


12 The assumption that the tropical ecosystem of Amazonia has been created solely by
natural forces
A has often been questioned by ecologists in the past.

B has been shown to be incorrect by recent research.

C was made by Peter Feinsinger and other ecologists.

D has led to some fruitful discoveries.


13 The application of our new insights into the Amazonian past would

A warn us against allowing any development at all.

B cause further suffering to the Indian communities.

C change present policies on development in the region.

D reduce the amount of hunting, fishing, and ‘slash-and-burn’.

Solution:

1. v 8. YES
2. i 9. YES

3. vi 10. C
4. NO 11. A

5. YES 12. B
6. NOT GIVEN 13. C

7. NO
