TITLE: Space: The Final Archaeological Frontier
INDEX: 397
============================================================

Space: The Final Archaeological Frontier

Space travel may still have a long nay to go, bur the notion of archaeological
research and heritage management in space is already concerning scientists and
environmentalists.


In 1993, University of Hawaii’s anthropologist Ben Finney, who for much of his career has
studied the technology once used by Polynesians to colonize islands in the Pacific,
suggested that it would not be premature to begin thinking about the archaeology of
Russian and American aerospace sites on the Moon and Mars. Finney pointed out that just
as todays scholars use archaeological records to investigate how Polynesians diverged
culturally as they explored the Pacific, archaeologists will someday study off-Earth sites to
trace the development of humans in space. He realized that it was unlikely anyone would
be able to conduct fieldwork in the near future, but he was convinced that one day such
work would be done.

There is a growing awareness, however, that it won’t be long before both corporate
adventurers and space tourists reach the Moon and Mars. There is a wealth of important
archaeological sites from the history of space exploration on the Moon and Mars and
measures need to be taken to protect these sites. In addition to the threat from profit-
seeking corporations, scholars cite other potentially destructive forces such as souvenir
hunting and unmonitored scientific sampling, as has already occurred in explorations of
remote polar regions. Already in 1999 one company was proposing a robotic lunar rover
mission beginning at the site of Tranquility Base and rumbling across the Moon from one
archaeological site to another, from the wreck of the Ranger S probe to Apollo 17 s landing
site. The mission, which would leave vehicle tyre- marks all over some of the most famous
sites on the Moon, was promoted as a form of theme-park entertainment.

According to the vaguely worded United Motions Outer Space Treaty of 1967. what it terms
‘space junk’ remains the property of the country that sent the craft or probe into space. But
the treaty doesn’t explicitly address protection of sites like Tranquility Base, and equating
the remains of human exploration of the heavens with ‘space junk’ leaves them vulnerable
to scavengers. Another problem arises through other international treaties proclaiming that
land in space cannot be owned by any country or individual. This presents some interesting
dilemmas for the aspiring manager of extraterrestrial cultural resources. Does the US own

Neil Armstrong's famous first footprints on the Moon but not the lunar dust in which they
were recorded? Surely those footprints are as important in the story of human development
as those left by hominids at Laetoli, Tanzania. But unlike the Laetoli prints, which have
survived for 3.5 million years encased in cement-like ash. those at Tranquility Base could
be swept away with a casual brush of a space tourist’s hand. To deal with problems like
these, it may be time to look to innovative international administrative structures for the
preservation of historic remains on the new frontier.

The Moon, with its wealth of sites, will surely be the first destination of archaeologists
trained to work in space. But any young scholars hoping to claim the mantle of history’s first
lunar archaeologist will be disappointed. That distinction is already taken.

On November 19. 1969. astronauts Charles Conrad and Alan Bean made a difficult manual
landing of the Apollo 12 lunar module in the Moon’s Ocean of Storms, just a few hundred
feet from an unmanned probe. Surveyor J. that had landed in a crater on April 19. 1967.
Unrecognized at the time, this was an important moment in the history of science. Bean
and Conrad were about to conduct the first archaeological studies on the Moon.

After the obligatory planting of the American flag and some geological sampling, Conrad
and Bean made their way to Surveyor 3. They observed that the probe had bounced after
touchdown and carefully photographed the impressions made by its footpads. The whole
spacecraft was covered in dust, perhaps kicked up by the landing.

The astronaut-archaeologists carefully removed the probes television camera, remote
sampling arm. and pieces of tubing. They bagged and labelled these artefacts, and stowed
them on board their lunar module. On their return to Earth, they passed them on to the
Daveson Space Center in Houston, Texas, and the Hughes Air and Space Corporation in
bl Segundo, California. There, scientists analyzed the changes in these aerospace
artefacts.

One result of the analysis astonished them. A fragment of the television camera revealed
evidence of the bacteria Streptococcus mitis. I or a moment it was thought Conrad and
Bean had discovered evidence for life on the Moon, but after further research the real
explanation became apparent. While the camera was being installed in the probe prior to
the launch, someone sneezed on it. The resulting bacteria had travelled to the Moon,
remained in an alternating freezing.' boiling vacuum for more than two years, and returned
promptly to life upon reaching the safety of a laboratory back on Earth.

The finding that not even the vastness of space can stop humans from spreading a sore
throat was an unexpected spin-off. Rut the artefacts brought back by Rean and Conrad
have a broader significance. Simple as they may seem, they provide the first example of
extraterrestrial archaeology and perhaps more significant for the history of the discipline
formational archaeology, the study of environmental and cultural forces upon the life history
of human artefacts in space.

Questions 1-6

Complete each sentence with the correct ending A-H from the box below.

Write the correct letter A-H in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.

1..................... Ben Finney's main academic work investigates the way that

2..................... Ben Finney thought that in the long term

3..................... Commercial pressures mean that in the immediate future
4..................... Academics are concerned by the fact that in isolated regions on

Earth.
5..................... One problem with the 1967 UN treaty is that

6..................... The wording of legal agreements over ownership of land in space
means that


A activities of tourists and scientists have harmed the environment.

B some sites in space could be important in the history of space exploration.

C vehicles used for tourism have polluted the environment.

D it may be unclear who has responsibility for historic human footprints.

E past explorers used technology in order to find new places to live.

F man-made objects left in space are regarded as rubbish.

G astronauts may need to work more closely with archaeologists.

H important sites on the Moon may be under threat.


Questions 7-11

Complete the flow chart below.

Choose NO MORE THAN ONE WORD from the passage for each answer.

During the
assembly
of the

Surveyor 3
probe,
someone
7................
..... on a
TV
camera.

The TV

Camera
was
carried to
the Moon
on
Surveyor 3

The TV
Camera
remained
on the
Moon for
over
8................
..... years

Apollo 12
astronauts
9................
..... the TV
camera

The TV
camera
was
returned to
Earth for
10..............
.......

The

Streptococ
cus mitis
bacteria
were
found.


The theory
that this
suggested
there was

11..............
....... on the
Moon
was rejecte
d.


Scientists
concluded
that the
bacteria
can survive
lunar
conditions.


Questions 12-13

Choose TWO letters A-E

The TWO main purposes of the writer of this text are to explain
A the reasons why space archaeology is not possible.

B the dangers that could follow from contamination of objects from space.

C the need to set up careful controls over space tourism.

D the need to preserve historic sites and objects in space.

E the possible cultural effects of space travel.

Solution:

1. E 8. two
2. B 9. removed

3. H 10. analysis
4. A 11. life

12. C, D (in either
5. F
order)
13. C, D (in either
6. D
order)
7. sneezed
