TITLE: Sport Science in Australia
INDEX: 402
============================================================

Sport Science in Australia

The professional career paths available to graduates from courses relating to human
movement and sport science are as diverse as the graduate’s imagination. However,
undergraduate courses with this type of content, in Australia as well as in most other
Western countries, were originally designed as preparation programmes for Physical
Education (PE) teachers.

The initial programmes commenced soon after the conclusion of World War II in the mid-
1940s. One of the primary motives for these initiatives was the fact that, during the war
effort, so many of the men who were assessed for military duty had been declared unfit.

The government saw the solution in the providing of Physical Education programmes in
schools, delivered by better prepared and specifically educated PE teachers.

Later, in the 1970s and early 1980s, the surplus of Australians graduating with a PE degree
obliged institutions delivering this qualification to identify new employment opportunities for
their graduates, resulting in the first appearance of degrees catering for recreation
professionals. In many instances, this diversity of programme delivery merely led to
degrees, delivered by physical educators, as a sideline activity to the production of PE
teachers.

Whilst the need to produce Physical Education teachers remains a significant social need,
and most developed societies demand the availability of quality leisure programmes for
their citizens, the career options of graduates within this domain are still developing. The
two most evident growth domains are in the area of the professional delivery of sport, and
the role of a physical lifestyle for community health.

The sports industry is developing at an unprecedented rate of growth. From a
business perspective, sport is now seen as an area with the potential for high returns. It is
quite significant that the businessman Rupert Murdoch broadened his business base from
media to sport, having purchased an American baseball team and an Australian Rugby
League competition, as well as seeking opportunities to invest in an English football club.
No business person of such international stature would see fit to invest in sport unless he
was satisfied that this was a sound business venture with ideal revenue-generating
opportunities.

These developments have confirmed sport as a business with professional management
structures, marketing processes, and development strategies in place. They have indicated
new and developing career paths for graduates of human movement science, sport
science, exercise science and related degrees. Graduates can now visualise career paths
extending into such diverse domains as sport management, sport marketing, event and
facility management, government policy development pertaining to sport, sport journalism,
sport psychology, and sport or athletic coaching.
Business leaders will only continue their enthusiasm for sport if they receive returns for
their money. Such returns will only be forthcoming if astute, enthusiastic and properly
educated professionals are delivering the programs that earn appropriate financial returns.
The successful universities of the 21st century will be those that have responded to this
challenge by delivering such degrees.
A second professional growth area for this group of graduates is associated with
community health. The increasing demand for government expenditure within health
budgets is reaching the stage where most governments are simply unable to function in a
manner that is satisfying their constituents. One of the primary reasons for this problem is
the unhelpful emphasis on treatment in medical care programmes. Governments have
traditionally given their senior health official the title of ‘Minister for Health’, when in fact this
officer has functioned as ‘Minister for Sickness and the Construction of Hospitals’.
Government focus simply has to change. If the change is not brought about for
philosophical reasons, it will occur naturally, because insufficient funding will be available to
address the ever-increasing costs of medical support.

Graduates of human movement, exercise science and sport science have the potential to
become major players in this shift in policy focus. It is these graduates who already have
the skills, knowledge and understanding to initiate community health education
programmes to reduce cardio-vascular disease, to reduce medical dependency upon
diabetes, to improve workplace health leading to increased productivity, to initiate and
promote programmes of activity for the elderly that reduce medical dependency, and to
maintain an active lifestyle for the unemployed and disadvantaged groups in society. This
is the graduate that governments will be calling upon to shift the community focus from
medical dependency to healthy lifestyles in the decades ahead.

The career paths of these graduates are developing at a pace that is not evident in other
professions. The contribution that these graduates can make to society, and the recognition
of this contribution is at an unprecedented high, and all indications are that it will continue
to grow.

Questions 1-5

Complete the flow chart below.

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.
The history of sports and physical science in Australia


A lot of people identified as being 1.....................

Introduction of PE to 2.....................

Special training programmes for 3.....................

4..................... of PE graduates

Identification of alternative 5.....................


Diversification of course delivery


Questions 6-13

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1 ? Write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this

6..................... Sport is generally regarded as a profitable area for investment.

7..................... Rupert Murdoch has a personal as well as a business interest in sport.

8..................... The range of career opportunities available to sport graduates is
increasing.

9..................... The interests of business and the interests of universities are linked.

10..................... Governments have been focusing too much attention on preventative
medicine.

11..................... It is inevitable that government priorities for health spending will change.

12..................... Existing degree courses are unsuitable for careers in community health.

13..................... Funding for sport science and related degrees has been increased
considerably.

Solution:

1. unfit 8. TRUE
2. schools 9. TRUE

10.
3. PE teachers
FALSE
11.
4. surplus
TRUE
5. employment 12.
opportunities/careers/routes FALSE
13. NOT
6. TRUE
GIVEN
7. NOT GIVEN
