TITLE: Stepwells
INDEX: 404
============================================================

Stepwells

A millennium ago, stepwells were fundamental to life in the driest parts of India. Although
many have been neglected, recent restoration has returned them to their former glory.
Richard Cox travelled to north-western India to document these spectacular monuments
from a bygone era.

During the sixth and seventh centuries, the inhabitants of the modern-day states of Gujarat
and Rajasthan in North-western India developed a method of gaining access to clean, fresh
groundwater during the dry season for drinking, bathing, watering animals and irrigation.
However, the significance of this invention – the stepwell – goes beyond its utilitarian
application.
Unique to the region, stepwells are often architecturally complex and vary widely in size
and shape. During their heyday, they were places of gathering, of leisure, of relaxation and
of worship for villagers of all but the lowest castes.Most stepwells are found dotted around
the desert areas of Gujarat (where they are called vav) and Rajasthan (where they are
known as baori), while a few also survive in Delhi. Some were located in or near villages as
public spaces for the community; others were positioned beside roads as resting places for
travellers.


As their name suggests, stepwells comprise a series of stone steps descending from
ground level to the water source (normally an underground aquifer) as it recedes following
the rains. When the water level was high, the user needed only to descend a few steps to
reach it; when it was low, several levels would have to be negotiated.


Some wells are vast, open craters with hundreds of steps paving each sloping side, often in
tiers. Others are more elaborate, with long stepped passages leading to the water via
several storeys built from stone and supported by pillars, they also included pavilions that
sheltered visitors from the relentless heat. But perhaps the most impressive features are
the intricate decorative sculptures that embellish many stepwells, showing activities from
fighting and dancing to everyday acts such as women combing their hair and churning
butter.


Down the centuries, thousands of wells were constructed throughout northwestern India,
but the majority have now fallen into disuse; many are derelict and dry, as groundwater has
been diverted for industrial use and the wells no longer reach the water table. Their
condition hasn’t been helped by recent dry spells: southern Rajasthan suffered an eight-
year drought between 1996 and 2004.


However, some important sites in Gujarat have recently undergone major restoration, and
the state government announced in June last year that it plans to restore the stepwells
throughout the state.


In Patan, the state’s ancient capital, the stepwell of Rani Ki Vav (Queen’s Stepwell) is
perhaps the finest current example. It was built by Queen Udayamati during the late 11th
century, but became silted up following a flood during the 13th century. But the
Archaeological Survey of India began restoring it in the 1960s, and today it’s in pristine
condition. At 65 metres long, 20 metres wide and 27 metres deep, Rani Ki Vav features
500 distinct sculptures carved into niches throughout the monument, depicting gods such
as Vishnu and Parvati in various incarnations. Incredibly, in January 2001, this ancient
structure survived a devastating earthquake that measured 7.6 on the Richter scale.

Another example is the Surya Kund in Modhera, northern Gujarat, next to the Sun Temple,
built by King Bhima I in 1026 to honour the sun god Surya. It’s actually a tank (kund means
reservoir or pond) rather than a well, but displays the hallmarks of stepwell architecture,
including four sides of steps that descend to the bottom in a stunning geometrical
formation. The terraces house 108 small, intricately carved shrines between the sets of
steps.


Rajasthan also has a wealth of wells. The ancient city of Bundi, 200 kilometres south of
Jaipur, is reknowned for its architecture, including its stepwells. One of the larger examples
is Raniji Ki Baori, which was built by the queen of the region, Nathavatji, in 1699. At 46
metres deep, 20 metres wide and 40 metres long, the intricately carved monument is one
of 21 baoris commissioned in the Bundi area by Nathavatji.


In the old ruined town of Abhaneri, about 95 kilometres east of Jaipur, is Chand Baori, one
of India’s oldest and deepest wells; aesthetically, it’s perhaps one of the most dramatic.
Built in around 850 AD next to the temple of Harshat Mata, the baori comprises hundreds
of zigzagging steps that run along three of its sides, steeply descending 11 storeys,
resulting in a striking geometric pattern when seen from afar. On the fourth side, covered
verandas supported by ornate pillars overlook the steps.


Still in public use is Neemrana Ki Baori, located just off the Jaipur–Dehli highway.
Constructed in around 1700, it’s nine storeys deep, with the last two levels underwater. At
ground level, there are 86 colonnaded openings from where the visitor descends 170 steps
to the deepest water source.


Today, following years of neglect, many of these monuments to medieval engineering have
been saved by the Archaeological Survey of India, which has recognised the importance of
preserving them as part of the country’s rich history. Tourists flock to wells in far-flung
corners of northwestern India to gaze in wonder at these architectural marvels from 1,000
years ago, which serve as a reminder of both the ingenuity and artistry of ancient
civilisations and of the value of water to human existence.

Questions 1–5

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?

In boxes 1–5 on your answer sheet, write


TRUE if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this

1..................... Examples of ancient stepwells can be found all over the world.
2..................... Stepwells had a range of functions, in addition to those related to water
collection.
3..................... The few existing stepwells in Delhi are more attractive than those found
elsewhere.
4..................... It took workers many years to build the stone steps characteristic of
stepwells.
5..................... The number of steps above the water level in a stepwell altered during the
course of a year.


Questions 6–8
Answer the questions below.


Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 6–8 on your answer sheet.


6 Which part of some stepwells provided shade for people? 6.....................
7 What type of serious climatic event, which took place in southern Rajasthan, is
mentioned in the article? 7.....................
8 Who are frequent visitors to stepwells nowadays?8.....................


Questions 9-13
Complete the table below


Choose ONE WORD AND/OR A NUMBER from the passage for each answer.


Write your answers in boxes 9-13 on your answer sheet.


Stepwells Date Features Other notes

Late Restored in the 1990s
Rani Ki As many as 500 sculptures decorate the
11th Excellent condition, despite the
Vav monument
century 9..................... of 2001.
Surya 1026 Steps on the 10..................... produce a looks more like a 11..................... then a
geometric pattern
Kund well.
Carved shrines.
Raniji Ki One of 21 baoris in the area
1699 Intricately carved monument
Baori commissioned by Queen Nathavatji
Old, deep and very dramatic
Chand Steps take you down 11 storeys to the
850 AD Has 12..................... which provide a
Baori bottom
view to the steps.
Neemrana
1700 Has two 13..................... levels. Used by public today
Ki Baori

Solution:

1. FALSE 8. tourists
2. TRUE 9. Earthquake

3. NOT
10. Four sides/4 sides
GIVEN
4. NOT
11. Tank
GIVEN
5. TRUE 12. verandas/verandahs
6. pavilions 13. underwater
7. drought
