TITLE: Stress of Workplace
INDEX: 405
============================================================

Stress of Workplace

A How busy is too busy? For some it means having to miss the occasional long lunch; for
others it means missing lunch altogether. For a few, it is not being able to take a “sickie”
once a month. Then there is a group of people for whom working every evening and
weekend is normal, and frantic is the tempo of their lives. For most senior executives,
workloads swing between extremely busy and frenzied. The vice-president of the
management consultancy AT Kearney and its head of telecommunications for the Asia-

Pacific region, Neil Plumridge, says his work weeks vary from a “manageable” 45 hours to
80 hours, but average 60 hours.

B Three warning signs alert Plumridge about his workload: sleep, scheduling and family.
He knows he has too much on when he gets less than six hours of sleep for three
consecutive nights; when he is constantly having to reschedule appointments; “and the
third one is on the family side”, says Plumridge, the father of a three-year-old daughter, and
expecting a second child in October. “If I happen to miss a birthday or anniversary, I know
things are out of control.” Being “too busy” is highly subjective. But for any individual, the
perception of being too busy over a prolonged period can start showing up as stress:
disturbed sleep, and declining mental and physical health. National workers’ compensation
figures show stress causes the most lost time of any workplace injury. Employees suffering
stress are off work an average of 16.6 weeks. The effects of stress are also expensive.
Comcare, the Federal Government insurer, reports that in 2003-04, claims for
psychological injury accounted for 7% of claims but almost 27% of claim costs. Experts say
the key to dealing with stress is not to focus on relief – a game of golf or a massage – but
to reassess workloads. Neil Plumridge says he makes it a priority to work out what has to
change; that might mean allocating extra resources to a job, allowing more time or
changing expectations. The decision may take several days. He also relies on the advice of
colleagues, saying his peers coach each other with business problems. “Just a fresh pair of
eyes over an issue can help,” he says.

C Executive stress is not confined to big organisations. Vanessa Stoykov has been
running her own advertising and public relations business for seven years, specialising in
work for financial and professional services firms. Evolution Media has grown so fast that it
debuted on the BRW Fast 100 list of fastest-growing small enterprises last year – just after
Stoykov had her first child. Stoykov thrives on the mental stimulation of running her own
business. “Like everyone, I have the occasional day when I think my head’s going to blow
off,” she says. Because of the growth phase the business is in, Stoykov has to concentrate
on short-term stress relief – weekends in the mountains, the occasional “mental health” day
– rather than delegating more work. She says: “We’re hiring more people, but you need to
train them, teach them about the culture and the clients, so it’s actually more work rather
than less.”

D Identify the causes: Jan Elsnera, Melbourne psychologist who specialises in executive
coaching, says thriving on a demanding workload is typical of senior executives and other
high-potential business people. She says there is no one-size-fits-all approach to stress:

some people work best with high-adrenalin periods followed by quieter patches, while
others thrive under sustained pressure. “We could take urine and blood hormonal
measures and pass a judgment of whether someone’s physiologically stressed or not,” she
says. “But that’s not going to give us an indicator of what their experience of stress is, and
what the emotional and cognitive impacts of stress are going to be.”

E Eisner’s practice is informed by a movement known as positive psychology, a school
of thought that argues “positive” experiences – feeling engaged, challenged, and that one
is making a contribution to something meaningful – do not balance out negative ones such
as stress; instead, they help people increase their resilience over time. Good stress, or
positive experiences of being challenged and rewarded, is thus cumulative in the same way
as bad stress. Elsner says many of the senior business people she coaches are relying
more on regulating bad stress through methods such as meditation and yoga. She points to
research showing that meditation can alter the biochemistry of the brain and actually help
people “retrain” the way their brains and bodies react to stress. “Meditation and yoga
enable you to shift the way that your brain reacts, so if you get proficient at it you’re in
control.”

F The Australian vice-president of AT Kearney, Neil Plumridge, says: “Often stress is
caused by our setting unrealistic expectations of ourselves. I’ll promise a client I’ll do
something tomorrow, and then promise another client the same thing, when I really know
it’s not going to happen. I’ve put stress on myself when I could have said to the clients:
‘Why don’t I give that to you in 48 hours?’ The client doesn’t care.” Over-committing is
something people experience as an individual problem. We explain it as the result of
procrastination or Parkinson’s law: that work expands to fill the time available. New
research indicates that people may be hard-wired to do it.
G A study in the February issue of the Journal of Experimental Psychology shows that
people always believe they will be less busy in the future than now. This is a
misapprehension, according to the authors of the report, Professor Gal Zauberman, of the
University of North Carolina, and Professor John Lynch, of Duke University. “On average,
an individual will be just as busy two weeks or a month from now as he or she is today. But
that is not how it appears to be in everyday life,” they wrote. “People often make
commitments long in advance that they would never make if the same commitments
required immediate action. That is, they discount future time investments relatively steeply.”
Why do we perceive a greater “surplus” of time in the future than in the present? The
researchers suggest that people underestimate completion times for tasks stretching into
the future, and that they are bad at imagining future competition for their time.

Question 1-5

Use the information in the passage to match the people (listed A-D) with opinions or deeds
below.

Write the appropriate letters A-D in boxes 14-18 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.

A Jan Elsnera
B Vanessa Stoykov
C Gal Zauberman
D Neil Plumridge

1..................... Work stress usually happens in the high level of a business.

2..................... More people’s ideas involved would be beneficial for stress relief.

3..................... Temporary holiday sometimes doesn’t mean less work.
4..................... Stress leads to a wrong direction when trying to satisfy customers.

5..................... It is not correct that stress in the future will be eased more than now.


Question 6-8

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write your answers in boxes 19-21 on your answer sheet.

6 Which of the following workplace stress is NOT mentioned according to Plumridge in
the following options

A Not enough time spend on family

B Unable to concentrate on work

C Inadequate time of sleep

D Alteration of appointment

7 Which of the following solution is NOT mentioned in helping reduce the work pressure
according toPlumridge

A Allocate more personnel

B Increase more time
C Lower expectation

D Do sports and massage

8 What is point of view of Jan Elsnera towards work stress

A Medical test can only reveal part of the data needed to cope with stress
B Index somebody samples will be abnormal in a stressful experience

C Emotional and cognitive affection is superior to physical one

D One well designed solution can release all stress


Question 9-14

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage, using NO MORE
THAN TWO WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 9-14 on your answer sheet.

Statistics from National worker’s compensation indicate stress plays the most important
role in 9..................... which cause the time losses. Staffs take about 10..................... for
absence from work caused by stress. Not just time is our main concern but great
expenses generated consequently. An official insurer wrote sometime that
about 11..................... of all claims were mental issues whereas nearly 27% costs in all
claims, Sports Such as 12..................... as well as 13..................... could be a treatment
to release stress; However, specialists recommended another practical way out,
analyse 14..................... once again.

Solution:

1. A 8. A
2. D 9. workplace injury

3. B 10. 16.6 weeks
4. D 11. 7%

5. C 12. golf
6. B 13. massage

7. D 14. workloads
