TITLE: STUDY CENTRE COURSES
INDEX: 410
============================================================

STUDY CENTRE COURSES

SELF-STUDY TIPS
A
However difficult you find it to arrange your time, it will involves the use of library books or other articles, it
pay off in the long run if you set aside a certain part of helps to keep details of the titles and authors on small
the day for studying - and stick to it. It is best to make cards in a card box. It is also a good idea to log these
a weekly allocation of your time, making sure that you alphabetically so that you can find them easily - rather
have enough left for recreational activities or simply to like keeping telephone numbers. It's all too easy to read
be 'with' yourself: reading a novel or watching a something and then forget where it came from.
television programme.
F
B Make use of equipment that is available to you. If you
As part of your weekly schedule, it is also advisable tofind a useful article in the library, it is best to make a
consider exactly what you have to do in that week, copy of the relevant pages before you leave. Then,
and make sure that you tackle the most significant when you get back to your study, you can mark the
tasks first, leaving the easier or less urgent areas of article and make any comments that you have in the
your work until later. margin.


C G
On a physical level, make sure that you have an area If you are working on a topic your teacher has set, but
or space for studying. Don't do it just anywhere. If you finding it hard to concentrate, it may be that you actually
always study in the same place, preferably a room of need to take your mind right off it for a period of time.
your own, you will find it easier to adjust mentally to 'Airing the mind' can work wonders sometimes. After a
the activity when you enter that area. You should period away from the task, having not thought about it at
have everything that you might need at hand. all, you may return to it refreshed and full of ideas.


D H
Make sure that all the physical equipment that you Similarly, it may help to discuss a topic with other
use, such as a desk, chair etc. is at a good height for people, especially if you feel that you have insufficient
you. If you use a personal computer, there are plenty ideas, or too many disorganised ideas. Bring your topic
of guidelines available from the government on up in conversations at meal times or with other students
posture, angles, lighting and the like. Consult these and see what they have to say. You don't want to copy
and avoid the typical student aches and pains. their ideas but listening to what they think about
something may well help you develop or refine your own
E thoughts.
If you are doing a long essay or research paper which


Questions 22-27

STUDY CENTRE COURSES
A E I
From Paragraph to Essay Media Use The Job for Me
Of particular relevance to students who wOisphe tno tiom aplrl osvtued tehnetisr ,o trhgias nciosautrisoen afol csFukisinlelsds ian ongnd i t t,wh aehp omp flaeynienylg tw hfoaarty stith waenierd fc ingaaenlt tppinrrogof diittu .l ciWnt gihsue insreeti cvcaealrln yc ilfter oaamlrl eg tnoho ewu rrgaohdn.igo? a Wndr ittteelenv aisnido no.r Uals ceo oufr sveid weoit he sssimenutlaiatli.o Gn reoxuepr cpisroejse cutssi nfogr mau pthaernt toicf cnoeuwrssep.aper advertisements.
Thursday 10-12 Tuesday 9-11 Friday 10-11.30
Kiran Singh Steve Ansell Fabbeh AI-Hussein
B F J
Communicate by Mail The Short Story Can I Help You?
Owing to the popularity of last term's courAs ev,e tnhtiusr eis ian troe tpheea wt. oRreldq oufe pstosp fuolra rin wfPorrritamecratsitc.i oaOnl n,c eon uosrttisofiercy af otisiro ssnet uoledf ceptneetrdss ofwonhra oal ddwaeipstahtai ltstoi oa nimn dinp treoon vacel os tshhuoerriert spte lwaleyipl l ahbnoedn l eog orsokkueilplds .pa Bet.rr fPeoalremkasas tenh cene oi.c tPee r tfeho-ara tnr rtehawinsgc ioesmd n egorrts oa.u Nbpuso s wwinereiltcsteosnm c soeku.irllsse r.equired.
Friday 2-4 Thursday 11-1.30 Wednesday 3-5
Cella Rice Mrs Owen Mike Vas
C G K
Source Material Caught for Speeding The Customer is Always Right
How do you gather information for a projeOcpt eonr ptoa paellr s?t uAd pernatcst.i cSaiml cpoleu resyee w ehxiceAhrnc l ioisnoetkess rte oas tht isneoglpu arycnoegusl e so k-f i hmino fwaonr mddo as tyciooanun .ar eHnpdol wyh ottoow l betoett eusressel ef rccotamivtae cl oougnsut otihnmege psryass?gt eeW.m Uhsas.tin tgo nhee aisd binegsst ,a tnodp icw hseennt?e nHcoews daon dy opua raacghriaepvhes r efosru eltass?y access.
Monday 10-11 Wednesday 11-1 Wednesday 11-1
Kiran Singh Mrs Owen Cella Rice
D H L
Express Yourself Quote Me if You Must Tense about Tenses
An advanced course suitable for studentsT wheh od oa'rse a anbdo duot nto't ss toefp u isnitnog o sroguarncisea Fmtoioarn tteshr oiwashle. e Hwreoh wtoh tewoyo irnmrcyao yar pbhooaruvate tte ht oeit ivrin oitniocd eyiv otihdueur iaor lwo wpnoi nwrdioosnr k-s aiinn l oavonak rai oacutc sete pfnotasruebmsle sa w.nady o. tHheorw a nsopte tcot sp olafg tihaeri slaen ogtuhaegr ep ethorpolueg'sh a proticelterys ,a bnodo skosn egt.c .Good voice helps but not essential!
Monday 12-2 Tuesday 9-10.30 Saturday 10-12

Dave Parrin Dr Johnson Steve Ansell

Questions 1-7

Reading Passage 2 has eight paragraphs, A-H.

Choose the correct heading for paragraphs B-H from the list of headings below..

Write the correct number i-xii, in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet.
List of Headings
i Consult your teacher
ii Take a break
iii Make a timetable
iv Create a working space
v Sit comfortably
vi Study at home
vii Talk about your work
viiiPhotocopy important material
ix Catalogue references
x Use the library
xi Prioritise your work
xii Exercise regularly
Example Paragraph A Answer iii
1..................... Paragraph B
2..................... Paragraph C
3..................... Paragraph D
4..................... Paragraph E
5..................... Paragraph F
6..................... Paragraph G
7..................... Paragraph H


Questions 8-13

Look at the twelve descriptions of courses, A-L, on Reading Passage 2.

For which description are the following statements true?
Write the correct letter, A-L, in boxes 8-13 on your answer sheet.

8..................... This course would be useful for dealing with letters of complaint.
9..................... This course will help you use the libraries.

10..................... This course will improve your performance at interviews.
11..................... This course will help you with acknowledging your sources.
12..................... This course will help you improve your reading skills.
13..................... This course will help you improve your grammar.

Solution:

1. xi 8. K
2. iv 9. C

3. v 10. I
4. ix 11. H

5. viii 12. G
6. ii 13. L

7. vii
