TITLE: Sunset for the Oil Business
INDEX: 412
============================================================

Sunset for the Oil Business

The world is about to run out of oil. Or perhaps not. It depends whom you believe…

A

Members of the Department Analysis Centre (ODAC) recently met in London and
presented technical data that support their grim forecast that the world is perilously close to
running out of oil. Leading lights of this moment, including the geologists Colin Campbell,
rejected rival views presented by American geological survey and the international energy
agency that contradicted their findings. Dr Campbell even decried the amazing display of
ignorance, denial and obfuscation by government, industry and academics on this topic.

B

So is the oil really running out? The answer is easy: Yes. Nobody seriously disputes the
notion that oil is, for all practical purposes, a non-renewable resource that will run out
someday, be that years or decades away. The harder question is determining when
precisely oil will begin to get scarce. And answering that question involves scaling
Hubbert’s peak.

C

M. King Hubbert, a Shell geologist of legendary status among depletion experts, forecast in
1956 that oil production in the United States would peak in the early 1970s and then slowly
decline, in something resembling a bell-shaped curve. At the time, his forecast was
controversial, and many rubbished it. After 1970, however, empirical evidence proved him
correct: oil production in America did indeed peak and has been in decline ever since.
D

Dr Hubbert’s analysis drew on the observation that oil production in a new area typically
rises quickly at first, as the easiest and cheapest reserves are tapped. Over time,
reservoirs age and go into decline, and so lifting oil becomes more expensive. Oil from that
area then becomes less competitive in relation to other fuels, or to oil from other areas. As
a result, production slows down and usually tapers off and declines. That, he argued, made
for a bell-shaped curve.

E

His successful prediction has emboldened a new generation of geologists to apply his
methodology on a global scale. Chief among them are the experts at ODAC, who worry
that the global peak in production will come in the next decade. Dr Campbell used to argue
that the peak should have come already; he now thinks it is just around the corner. A
heavyweight has now joined this gloomy chorus. Kenneth Deffeyes of Princeton University
argues in a lively new book (“The View from Hubbert’s Peak”) that global oil production
could peak as soon as 2004.

F

That sharply contradicts mainstream thinking. America’s Geological Survey prepared an
exhaustive study of oil depletion last year (in part to rebut Dr Campbell’s arguments) that
put the peak of production some decades off. The IEA has just weighed in with its new
“World Energy Outlook”, which foresees enough oil to comfortably meet the demand to
2020 from remaining reserves. René Dahan, one of ExxonMobil’s top managers, goes
further: with an assurance characteristic of the world’s largest energy company, he insists
that the world will be awash in oil for another 70 years.

G

Who is right? In making sense of these wildly opposing views, it is useful to look back at
the pitiful history of oil forecasting. Doomsters have been predicting dry wells since the
1970s, but so far the oil is still gushing. Nearly all the predictions for 2000 made after the

1970s oil shocks were far too pessimistic. America’s Department of Energy thought that oil
would reach $150 a barrel (at 2000 prices); even Exxon predicted a price of $100.

H
Michael Lynch of DRI-WEFA, an economic consultancy, is one of the few oil forecasters
who has got things generally right. In a new paper, Dr Lynch analyses those historical
forecasts. He finds evidence of both bias and recurring errors, which suggests that
methodological mistakes (rather than just poor data) were the problem. In particular, he
faults forecasters who used Hubbert-style analysis for relying on fixed estimates of how
much “ultimately recoverable” oil there really is below ground, in the industry’s jargon: that
figure, he insists, is actually a dynamic one, as improvements in infrastructure, knowledge
and technology raise the amount of oil which is recoverable.

I

That points to what will probably determine whether the pessimists or the optimists are
right: technological innovation. The first camp tends to be dismissive of claims of
forthcoming technological revolutions in such areas as deep-water drilling and enhanced
recovery. Dr Deffeyes captures this end-of-technology mindset well. He argues that
because the industry has already spent billions on technology development, it makes it
difficult to ask today for new technology, as most of the wheels have already been
invented.
J

Yet techno-optimists argue that the technological revolution in oil has only just begun.
Average recovery rates (how much of the known oil in a reservoir can actually be brought
to the surface) are still only around 30-35%. Industry optimists believe that new techniques
on the drawing board today could lift that figure to 50-60% within a decade.
K

Given the industry’s astonishing track record of innovation, it may be foolish to bet against
it. That is the result of adversity: the nationalisations of the 1970s forced Big Oil to develop
reserves in expensive, inaccessible places such as the North Sea and Alaska, undermining
Dr Hubbert’s assumption that cheap reserves are developed first. The resulting upstream
investments have driven down the cost of finding and developing wells over the last two
decades from over $20 a barrel to around $6 a barrel. The cost of producing oil has fallen
by half, to under $4 a barrel.

L
Such miracles will not come cheap, however, since much of the world’s oil is now produced
in ageing fields that are rapidly declining. The IEA concludes that global oil production need
not peak in the next two decades if the necessary investments are made. So how much is
necessary? If oil companies are to replace the output lost at those ageing fields and meet
the world’s ever-rising demand for oil, the agency reckons they must invest $1 trillion in
non-OPEC countries over the next decade alone. That’s quite a figure.

Questions 1-5

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage ?

In boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement agrees with the information

NO if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this


1..................... Hubbert has a high-profile reputation amongst ODAC members.

2..................... Oil is likely to last longer than some other energy sources.

3..................... The majority of geologists believe that oil with start to run out sometime
this decade.

4..................... Over 50 percent of the oil we know about is currently being recovered.

5..................... History has shown that some of Hubbert’s principles were mistaken.


Questions 6-9

Complete the notes below

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 6-9 on your answer sheet.


Many people believed Hubbert’s theory was 6..................... when it was originally
presented.

(1) When an oilfield is 7....................., it is easy to…
(2) The recovery of the oil gets more 8..................... as the reservoir gets older

(3) The oilfield can’t be as 9..................... as other areas.


Questions 10-14

Look at the following statements (questions 10-14) and the list of people below.
Match each statement with the correct person, A-E.

Write the correct letter, A-E in boxes 10-14 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.
10..................... has found fault in the geological research procedure

11..................... has provided the longest-range forecast regarding oil supply

12..................... has convinced others that oil production will follow a particular model

13..................... has accused fellow scientists of refusing to see the truth

14..................... has expressed doubt over whether improved methods of extracting oil are
possible.
List of People

A Colin Campell

B M. King Hubbert

C Kenneth Deffeyes

D Rene Dahan

E Michael Lynch

Solution:

1. YES 8. expensive
2. NOT GIVEN 9. competitive

3. NO 10. E
4. NO 11. D

5. YES 12. B
6. controversial 13. A

7. tapped 14. C
