TITLE: Sustainable growth at Didcot The outline of a report by
INDEX: 414
============================================================

Sustainable growth at Didcot The outline of a report by

South Oxfordshire District Council

A
The UK Government’s South East Plan proposes additional housing growth in the town of

Didcot, which has been a designated growth area since 1979. We in South Oxfordshire
District Council consider that, although Didcot does have potential for further growth, such
development should be sustainable, well-planned, and supported by adequate
infrastructure and community services.

B

Recent experience in Didcot has demonstrated that large greenfield [1] developments
cannot resource all the necessary infrastructure and low-cost housing requirements. The
ensuing compromises create a legacy of local transport, infrastructure and community
services deficits, with no obvious means of correction. We wish to ensure that there is
greater recognition of the cost attached to housing growth, and that a means is found to
resource the establishment of sustainable communities in growth areas.

C

Until the 1950s, the development of job opportunities in the railway industry, and in a large,
military ordnance depot, was the spur to Didcot’s expansion. Development at that time was
geared to providing homes for the railway and depot workers, with limited investment in
shopping and other services for the local population. Didcot failed to develop Broadway as
a compact town centre, and achieved only a strip of shops along one side of the main
street hemmed in by low density housing and service trade uses.

D

From the 1970s, strategic planning policies directed significant new housing development
to Didcot. Planners recognised Didcot’s potential, with rapid growth in local job
opportunities and good rail connections for those choosing to work farther afield. However,
the town is bisected by the east-west railway, and people living in Ladygrove, the urban
extension to the north which has been built since the 1980s, felt, and still feel, cut off from
the town and its community.

E

Population growth in the new housing areas failed to spark adequate private-sector
investment in town centre uses, and the limited investment which did take place - Didcot
Market Place development in 1982, for instance - did not succeed in delivering the number
and range of town centre uses needed by the growing population. In 1990, public-sector
finance was used to buy the land required for the Orchard Centre development, comprising
a superstore, parking and a new street of stores running parallel to Broadway. The
development took 13 years to complete.

F

The idea that, by obliging developers of new housing to contribute to the cost of
infrastructure and service requirements, all the necessary finance could be raised, has
proved unachievable. Substantial public finance was still needed to deliver major projects
such as the new link road to the A34 on the outskirts of the town at Milton, the improved
railway crossing at Marsh Bridge and new schools. Such projects were delayed due to
difficulties in securing public finance. The same problem also held back expansion of health
and social services in the town.
G

In recent years, government policy, in particular the requirement for developers that forty
percent of the units in a new housing development should be low cost homes, has had a
major impact on the economics of such development, as it has limited the developers’
contribution to the costs of infrastructure. The planning authorities are facing difficult
choices in prioritising the items of infrastructure which must be funded by development, and
this, in turn, means that from now on public finance will need to provide a greater
proportion of infrastructure project costs.

H

The Government’s Sustainable Communities Plan seeks a holistic approach to new urban
development in which housing, employment, services and infrastructure of all kinds are
carefully planned and delivered in a way which avoids the infrastructure deficits that have
occurred in places like Didcot in the past. This report, therefore, is structured around the
individual components of a sustainable community, and shows the baseline position for
each component.

I

Didcot has been identified as one of the towns with which the Government is working to
evaluate whether additional growth will strengthen the economic potential of the town,
deliver the necessary infrastructure and improve environmental standards. A programme of
work, including discussions with the local community about their aspirations for the town as
well as other stakeholders, will be undertaken over the coming months, and will lead to the
development of a strategic master plan. The challenge will be in optimising scarce
resources to achieve maximum benefits for the town.

[1] land that has never previously been built on

Questions 1-6

Reading Passage 2 has 9 paragraphs, A-l.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter, A-l.

1..................... reference to the way the council’s report is organised

2..................... the reason why inhabitants in one part of Didcot are isolated
3..................... a statement concerning future sources of investment

4..................... the identification of two major employers at Didcot

5..................... reference to groups who will be consulted about a new development plan

6..................... an account of how additional town centre facilities were previously funded


Questions 7-10

Look at the following places and the list of statements below.

Match each place with the correct statement, A-F.

Write the correct letter, A-F.

7..................... Broadway

8..................... Market Place

9..................... Orchard Centre

10..................... Marsh Bridge


List of statements
A It provided extra facilities for shopping and cars.

B Its location took a long time to agree.

C Its layout was unsuitable.

D Its construction was held up due to funding problems.

E It was privately funded.

F It failed to get Council approval at first.


Questions 11-13
Complete the sentences below.

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from the passage for each answer.

11 A certain proportion of houses in any new development now have to be of
the11..................... type.

12 The government is keen to ensure that adequate 12..................... will be provided for
future housing developments.

13 The views of Didcot’s inhabitants and others will form the basis of a 13.....................
for the town.

Solution:

1. H 8. E
2. D 9. A

3. G 10. D
4. C 11. low cost

5. I 12. infrastructure
6. E 13. strategic master plan

7. C
