TITLE: Telepathy
INDEX: 420
============================================================

Telepathy

Can human beings communicate by thought alone? For more than a century the issue of
telepathy has divided the scientific community, and even today it still sparks bitter
controversy among top academics

Since the 1970s, parapsychologists at leading universities and research institutes around
the world have risked the derision of sceptical colleagues by putting the various claims for
telepathy to the test in dozens of rigorous scientific studies. The results and
their implications are dividing even the researchers who uncovered them.

Some researchers say the results constitute compelling evidence that telepathy is genuine.
Other parapsychologists believe the field is on the brink of collapse, having tried to produce
definitive scientific proof and failed. Sceptics and advocates alike do concur on one issue,
however: that the most impressive evidence so far has come from the so-called 'ganzfeld'
experiments, a German term that means 'whole field'. Reports of telepathic experiences
had by people during meditation led parapsychologists to suspect that telepathy might
involve 'signals' passing between people that were so faint that they were usually swamped
by normal brain activity. In this case, such signals might be more easily detected by those
experiencing meditation-like tranquillity in a relaxing 'whole field' of light, sound and
warmth.

The ganzfeld experiment tries to recreate these conditions with participants sitting in soft
reclining chairs in a sealed room, listening to relaxing sounds while their eyes are covered
with special filters letting in only soft pink light. In early ganzfeld experiments, the telepathy
test involved identification of a picture chosen from a random selection of four taken from a
large image bank. The idea was that a person acting as a 'sender' would attempt to beam
the image over to the 'receiver' relaxing in the sealed room.
Once the session was over, this person was asked to identify which of the four images had
been used. Random guessing would give a hit-rate of 25 per cent; if telepathy is
real, however, the hit-rate would be higher. In 1982, the results from the first ganzfeld
studies were analysed by one of its pioneers, the American parapsychologist Charles
Honorton. They pointed to typical hit-rates of better than 30 per cent - a small effect, but
one which statistical tests suggested could not be put down to chance.

The implication was that the ganzfeld method had revealed real evidence for telepathy. But
there was a crucial flaw in this argument - one routinely overlooked in more conventional
areas of science. Just because chance had been ruled out as an explanation did not prove
telepathy must exist; there were many other ways of getting positive results. These ranged
from 'sensory leakage' - where clues about the pictures accidentally reach the receiver - to
outright fraud. In response, the researchers issued a review of all the ganzfeld studies done
up to 1985 to show that 80 per cent had found statistically significant evidence. However,
they also agreed that there were still too many problems in the experiments which could
lead to positive results, and they drew up a list demanding new standards for future
research.

After this, many researchers switched to autoganzfeld tests - an automated variant of the
technique which used computers to perform many of the key tasks such as the
random selection of images. By minimising human involvement, the idea was to minimise
the risk of flawed results. In 1987, results from hundreds of autoganzfeld tests were studied
by Honorton in a 'meta-analysis', a statistical technique for finding the overall results from
a set of studies. Though less compelling than before, the outcome was still impressive.

Yet some parapsychologists remain disturbed by the lack of consistency between individual
ganzfeld studies. Defenders of telepathy point out that demanding impressive evidence
from every study ignores one basic statistical fact: it takes large samples to detect small
effects. If, as current results suggest, telepathy produces hit-rates only marginally above
the 25 per cent expected by chance, it's unlikely to be detected by a typical ganzfeld study
involving around 40 people: the group is just not big enough. Only when many studies are
combined in a meta-analysis will the faint signal of telepathy really become apparent. And
that is what researchers do seem to be finding.

What they are certainly not finding, however, is any change in attitude of mainstream
scientists: most still totally reject the very idea of telepathy. The problem stems at least
in part from the lack of any plausible mechanism for telepathy.

Various theories have been put forward, many focusing on esoteric ideas from theoretical
physics. They include 'quantum entanglement', in which events affecting one group of
atoms instantly affect another group, no matter how far apart they may be. While physicists
have demonstrated entanglement with specially prepared atoms, no-one knows if it also
exists between atoms making up human minds. Answering such questions would transform
parapsychology. This has prompted some researchers to argue that the future lies not in
collecting more evidence for telepathy, but in probing possible mechanisms. Some work
has begun already, with researchers trying to identify people who are particularly
successful in autoganzfeld trials. Early results show that creative and artistic people do
much better than average: in one study at the University of Edinburgh, musicians achieved
a hit-rate of 56 per cent. Perhaps more tests like these will eventually give the researchers
the evidence they are seeking and strengthen the case for the existence of telepathy.

Questions 1-4

Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-G, below.

Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.


A the discovery of a mechanism for telepathy.

B the need to create a suitable environment for telepathy.

C their claims of a high success rate.

D a solution to the problem posed by random guessing.
E the significance of the ganzfeld experiments.

F a more careful selection of subjects.

G a need to keep altering conditions.


1 Researchers with differing attitudes towards telepathy agree on 1.....................
2 Reports of experiences during meditation indicated 2.....................

3 Attitudes to parapsychology would alter drastically with 3.....................

4 Recent autoganzfeld trials suggest that success rates will improve with 4.....................


Questions 5-14

Complete the table below.

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 5-14 on your answer sheet.

Telepathy Experiments

Name/Date Description Result Flaw
Involved a person acting as

Ganzfeld a 5....................., who picked out Hit-rates were
Positive results could be produced by
one 6..................... from a random higher than
studies factors such as 8.....................
selection of four, and with random
or 9.....................
1982 a 7....................., who then tried to guessing.
identify it.
Autoganzfeld 10..................... were used for key The results The 13..................... between different test
tasks to limit the amount were then results was put down to the fact that
studies
of 11..................... in carrying out the subjected to a sample groups were not 14.....................
12...................
1987 tests. (as with most ganzfeld studies).
..

Solution:

8. sensory leakage,
1. E (outright) fraud IN
EITHER ORDER
9. sensory leakage,

2. B (outright) fraud IN
EITHER ORDER
3. A 10. computers

4. F 11. human involvement
5. sender 12. meta-analysis

6. picture/image 13. lack of consistency
7. receiver 14. big/large enough
