TITLE: Tele-working
INDEX: 421
============================================================

Tele-working

A

Teleworking – working remotely from an office- is said to have many benefits for
organisations, the environment and society. It provokes mixed reactions from its acolytes
and those that experience it first-hand. Whether you like it or not, it is true to say that work
is no longer dependent on geography and this opens up a range of opportunities for
working in new ways and environments.

B

The surveys show “that the productivity increase is not primarily because of longer working
hours (as is sometimes suggested). Although prevalent, working more is just one of a
number of influencing factors, and not the most important.” An unusual comparison of the
performance of teleworkers with a closely matched control group of non-teleworkers found
that not only was productivity higher but also that absenteeism and error rates were lower.

C

Two other areas where SUSTEL has added to the economic impact knowledge base is its
effect on absenteeism and space utilisation. In the case of absenteeism, over 60 per cent
of those surveyed stated that telework had enabled them to work when they were
prevented from reaching a work location (usually through illness or transport problems).

Around half the cases also identified substantial reductions in space requirements – to the
point where one organisation had completely done away with a central office. Changes in
non-commuting travel on weekends: home-bases workers, which includes a substantial
population of people who are not telecommuters, spend more time shopping out of the
home than traditional workers.

D

Half-time telecommuting could reduce carbon emissions by over 51 million metric tons a
year—the equivalent of taking all of New York’s commuters off the road. Additional carbon
footprint savings will come from reduced: office energy, roadway repairs, urban heating,
office construction, business travel, paper usage (as electronic documents replace paper).
Although energy utilization will continue to grow as we expand our industry and improve
our standard of living, efficient use of energy will always be of prime importance. By
telecommuting to work instead of using more conventional methods, there is a great
potential to save energy. The three major areas where energy can be conserved are
Vehicle-related materials and resources; Highway-related materials and resources; and
work-related materials and resources.

E

A tremendous amount of energy is required to produce transportation equipment such as
automobiles, buses, trains and jet aircraft. If telecommuting is promoted, there will be less
use of this equipment and less energy will be required for production, maintenance and
repair of this equipment. Fuel resources and gases needed to operate this equipment will
be reduced, as well the building and repair of highways and maintenance requires a large
consumption of energy, not only in the operation of the highway construction and repair
equipment but also in the manufacture and transportation of the required materials An
increase in the percentage of people telecommuting to work will decrease the need for
expanded highways and associated road maintenance. The first two areas related to
getting to work.

F

Socially, the SUSTEL research found that most survey respondents felt that teleworking
gave them a better quality of life and work-life balance. Many also reported health benefits.
A significant number also stated that they were using local services more and becoming
more involved in their local communities. The loss of teamwork and team spirit within
teleworking populations was tackled through ideas such as Oracle’s ‘FUNctional’ offices.
Designed to increase communication and interaction when people are at the office, they
are bright and focused around a central cafe to stimulate ideas and face-to-face contact.

G
The finding that many teleworkers report both longer working hours and a better quality of
life is paradoxical. More time working is usually associated with increased stress, domestic
tension and other factors that reduce the quality of life. One possible explanation is that, for
many individuals, their increased working hours will be less than the time they have saved
in commuting. Hence, they still have more time available for family and other activities. For
some, the stress associated with commuting (especially for long distances) may be less
than that arising from additional working time. Perhaps most significantly, teleworking can
in effect create time through opportunities for multi-tasking or greater control of activities.
As one survey respondent noted. “Although the amount of time has not changed it has
made the weekends freer, as domestic activities can be fitted in during lunchtimes or early
morning.”
H

When you work in an office or a cubicle and something goes wrong with any hardware or
software you have the option of calling in the IT man. In fact, all of the equipment that you
use at the office is supported by technical staff. That means regular updates and
maintenance for various and sundry office tools like land-line phones, computers, internet
connections, laptops, cell phones, printers, and other office equipment is all up to you when
you work from home, you’ll surely encounter technical problems and when you do, where
do you get the support and help you need? If your computer hard drive crashed today,
would you have the funds to replace it?

Questions 1-8

Complete the summary using the list of words, A-N below.

Write the correct letter, A-N, in boxes 1-8 on your answer sheet.


Teleworking has been said to have many benefits for both society and companies. Survey
identified that telecommuters spend more time on 1..................... than those traditional
workers on changes in non-commuting travel on weekends. It also is beneficial to the
environment as it reduces the 2..................... in the atmosphere from decreased street
repairs, city heating, or even 3..................... as staff in office could send
documents 4..................... Apart from that, other materials such as Vehicle-related,
Highway-related and 5..................... materials will also be saved. Traditionally, a large
amount of energy is needed to make 6....................., e.g. Public transportation and private
cars. With the rise of telecommuting, resources and 7..................... will be saved. And
conservation goes to the energy and materials consumed in all 8.....................


A pollution B internet energy C paper usage

D construction and maintenance E materials

F shopping G productivity H fuels and gases

I electronically J IT K equipment L company

M work-related N geography


Questions 9-12

Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-F, below.

Write the correct letter, A-F, in box 9-12 on your answer sheet.


9..................... More working time is often connected with:

10..................... Oracle’s Functional idea aims to improve:
11..................... When you work at office equipments such as computers and printers are
maintained by:
12..................... When work from home using hardware and software:

A stress and tension.

B consumption of goods.

C the problem of less communication with colleagues.

D many problems when equipment doesn’t work.
E transport equipment such as automobiles.

F technical supporters.


Questions 13

Answer the question 13 and choose correct letter A, B, C or D.

Implied in the passage, what is the author’s attitude toward Telework?

A surprised by its fast growth

B unconcerned about the future pattern

C believe it is generally positive and encouraging
D worried in the economical problems arise

Solution:

1. F 8. D
2. A 9. A

3. C 10. C
4. I 11. F

5. M 12. D
6. K 13. C

7. H
