TITLE: The Adolescents
INDEX: 426
============================================================

The Adolescents

A

The American Academy of Pediatrics recognizes three stages of adolescence. These are
early, middle and late adolescence, and each has its own developmental tasks. Teenagers
move through these tasks at their own speed depending on their physical development and
hormone levels. Although these stages are common to all teenagers, each child will go
through them in his or her own highly individual ways.

B

During the early years young people make the first attempts to leave the dependent,
secure role of a child and to establish themselves as unique individuals, independent of
their parents. Early adolescence is marked by rapid physical growth and maturation. The
focus of adolescents’ self-concepts is thus often on their physical self and their evaluation
of their physical acceptability. Early adolescence is also a period of intense conformity to
peers. ‘Getting along,’ not being different, and being accepted seem somehow pressing to
the early adolescent. The worst possibility, from the view of the early adolescent, is to be
seen by peers as ‘different’.

C
Middle adolescence is marked by the emergence of new thinking skills. The intellectual
world of the young person is suddenly greatly expanded. Their concerns about peers are
more directed toward their opposite sexed peers. It is also during this period that the move
to establish psychological independence from one’s parents accelerates. Delinquency
behavior may emerge since parental views are no longer seen as absolutely correct by
adolescents. Despite some delinquent behavior, middle adolescence is a period during
which young people are oriented toward what is right and proper. They are developing a
sense of behavioral maturity and learning to control their impulsiveness.

D

Late adolescence is marked by the final preparations for adult roles. The developmental
demands of late adolescence often extend into the period that we think of as young
adulthood. Late adolescents attempt to crystallize their vocational goals and to establish a
sense of personal identity. Their needs for peer approval are diminished and they are
largely psychologically independent from their parents. The shift to adulthood is nearly
complete.
E

Some years ago, Professor Robert Havighurst of the University of Chicago proposed that
stages in human development can best be thought of in terms of the developmental tasks
that are part of the normal transition. He identified eleven developmental tasks associated
with the adolescent transition. One developmental task an adolescent needs to achieve is
to adjust to a new physical sense of self. At no other time since birth does an individual
undergo such rapid and profound physical changes as during early adolescence. Puberty is
marked by sudden rapid growth in height and weight. Also, the young person experiences
the emergence and accentuation of those physical traits that make him or her a boy or girl.
The effect of this rapid change is that young adolescent often becomes focused on his or
her body.

F

Before adolescence, children’s thinking is dominated by a need to have a concrete
example for any problem that they solve. Their thinking is constrained to what is real and
physical. During adolescence, young people begin to recognize and understand
abstractions. The adolescent must adjust to increased cognitive demands at school. Adults
see high school in part as a place where adolescents prepare for adult roles and
responsibilities and in part as preparatory for further education. School curricula are
frequently dominated by the inclusion of more abstract, demanding material, regardless of
whether the adolescents have achieved formal thought. Since not all adolescents make the
intellectual transition at the same rate, demands for abstract thinking prior to achievement
of that ability may be frustrating.

G

During adolescence, as teens develop increasingly complex knowledge systems and a
sense of self, they also adopt an integrated set of values and morals. During the early
stages of moral development, parents provide their child with a structured set of rules of
what is right and wrong, what is acceptable and unacceptable. Eventually, the adolescent
must assess the parents’ values as they come into conflict with values expressed by peers
and other segments of society. To reconcile differences, the adolescent restructures those
beliefs into a personal ideology.

H

The adolescent must develop expanded verbal skills. As adolescents mature intellectually,
as they face increased school demands, and as they prepare for adult roles, they must
develop new verbal skills to accommodate more complex concepts and tasks. Their limited
language of childhood is no longer adequate. Adolescents may appear less competent
because of their inability to express themselves meaningfully.

I

The adolescent must establish emotional and psychological independence from his or her
parents. Childhood is marked by a strong dependence on one’s parents. Adolescents may
yearn to keep that safe, secure, supportive, dependent relationship. Yet, to be an adult
implies a sense of independence, of autonomy, of being one’s own person. Adolescents
may vacillate between their desire for dependence and their need to be independent. In an
attempt to assert their need for independence and individuality, adolescents may respond
with what appears to be hostility and lack of cooperation.

J

Adolescents do not progress through these multiple developmental tasks separately. At
any given time, adolescents may be dealing with several. Further, the centrality of specific
developmental tasks varies with early, middle, and late periods of the transition.

Questions 1-6

Match the following characteristics with the correct stages of the adolescent.

Write the correct letter, A, B or C, in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.

A early adolescence

B middle adolescence

C later adolescence
1..................... interested in the opposite sex

2..................... exposure to danger

3..................... the same as others

4..................... beginning to form individual thinking without family context

5..................... less need the approval of friends

6..................... intellectual booming


Questions 7-10

Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-F, below.

Write the correct letters, A-F, in boxes 7-10 on your answer sheet.

7..................... One of Havighurst’s research

8..................... High School Courses

9..................... Adolescence is a time when young people
10..................... The developmental speed of thinking patterns

List of the statements

A form personal identity with a set of morals and values

B develops a table and productive peer relationships


C are designed to be more challenging than some can accept

D varies from people to people

E focuses on creating a self-image

F become an extension of their parents


Questions 11-13
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?

In boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement is true

FALSE if the statement is false

NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage
11..................... The adolescent lacks the ability to think abstractly.


12..................... Adolescents may have a deficit in their language ability.


13..................... The adolescent experiences a transition from reliance on his parents to
independence.

Solution:

1. B 8. C
2. A 9. A

3. A 10. D
4. A 11. FALSE

5. C 12. TRUE
6. B 13. TRUE

7. E
