TITLE: The birds of London
INDEX: 434
============================================================

The birds of London

There are more than two hundred different species and sub-species of birds in the London
area, ranging from the magpie to the greenfinch, but perhaps the most ubiquitous is the
pigeon. It has been suggested that the swarms of feral pigeons are all descended from
birds which escaped from dovecotes in the early medieval period; they found a natural
habitat in the crannies and ledges of buildings as did their ancestors, the rock doves, amid
the sea-girt cliffs. ‘They nest in small colonies,’ one observer has written, ‘usually high up
and inaccessible’ above the streets of London as if the streets were indeed a sea. A man
fell from the belfry of St Stephens Walbrook in 1277 while in quest of a pigeon’s nest, while
the Bishop of London complained in 1385 of ‘malignant persons’ who threw stones at the
pigeons resting in the city churches. So pigeons were already a familiar presence, even if
they were not treated with the same indulgence as their more recent successors. A
modicum of kindness to these creatures seems to have been first shown in the late
nineteenth century, when they were fed oats rather than the customary stale bread.

From the end of the nineteenth century, wood pigeons also migrated into the city; they
were quickly urbanised, increasing both in numbers and in tameness. ‘We have frequently
seen them on die roofs of houses,’ wrote the author of Bird Life in London in 1893,
apparently as much at home as any dovecote pigeon.’ Those who look up today may
notice their ‘fly-lines’ in the sky. from Lincoln’s Inn Fields over Kingsway and Trafalgar
Square to Battersea, with other lines to Victoria Park and to Kenwood. The air of London is
filled with such ‘fly-lines’, and to trace the paths of the birds would be to envisage the city in
an entirely different form; then it would seem linked and unified by thousands of
thoroughfares and small paths of energy, each with its own history of use.

The sparrows move quickly in public places, and they arc now so much part of London
that they have been adopted by the native population as the sparred; a friend was known to
Cockneys as a ‘cocksparrer’ in tribute to a bird which is sweet and yet watchful, blessed
with a dusky plumage similar to that of the London dust, a plucky little bird darting in and
out of the city’s endless uproar. They are small birds which can lose body heat very quickly,
so they are perfectly adapted to the ‘heat island’ of London. They will live in any small
cranny or cavity, behind drainpipes or ventilation shafts, or in public statues, or holes in
buildings; in that sense diet are perfectly suited to a London topography. An ornithologist
who described the sparrow as peculiarly attached to man’ said it never now breeds at any
distance from an occupied building’. This sociability, bred upon the fondness of the
Londoner, is manifest in many ways. One naturalist, W.H. Hudson, has described how any
stranger in a green space or public garden will soon find that ‘several sparrows are keeping
him company … watching his every movement, and if he sits down on a chair or a bench
several of them will come close to him, and hop this way and that before him, uttering a
little plaintive note of interrogation — Have you got nothing for us? They have also been
described as die urchins of the streets — ‘thievish, self-assertive and pugnacious’ — a
condition which again may merit the attention and admiration of native Londoners.
Remarkably attached to their surroundings, they rarely create ‘fly-lines’ across the city;
where they are born, like other Londoners, they stay.

There are some birds, such as the robin and the chaffinch, which are less approachable
and trustful in the city than in the country. Other species, such as the mallard, grow
increasingly shyer as they leave London. There has been a severe diminution of the
number of sparrows, while blackbirds are more plentiful. Swans and ducks have also
increased in number. Some species, however, have all but vanished. The rooks of London
are, perhaps, the most notable of the disappeared, their rookeries destroyed by building
work or by tree-felling. Areas of London were continuously inhabited by rooks for many
hundreds of years. The burial ground of St Deinstalls in the East and the college garden of
the Ecclesiastical Court in Doctors’ Commons, the turrets of the Tower of London and the
gardens of Grays Inn, were once such localities. There was a rookery in the Inner Temple
dating from at least 1666, mentioned by Oliver Goldsmith in 1774. Rooks nested on Bow
Church and on St Olave’s. They were venerable London birds, preferring to cluster around
ancient churches and the like as if they were their local guardians. Yet, in the words of the
nineteenth-century song, ‘Now the old rooks have lost their places’. There was a grove in
Kensington Gardens devoted to the rooks; it contained some seven hundred trees forming
a piece of wild nature, a matter of delight and astonishment to those who walked among
them and listened to the endless cawing that blotted out the city’s noise. But the trees were
torn down in 1880. The rooks have never returned.

Questions 1-4

Answer the questions below using NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.

1 What kind of birds are the London pigeons descended from? 1.....................

2 What were pigeons given to eat before attitudes towards them changed? 2.....................

3 What are the routes taken by wood pigeons known as? 3.....................

4 What TWO activities have contributed to the drastic reduction in the number of rooks ?
4.....................


Questions 5-9

Complete the notes below.

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 5-9 on your answer sheet.

SPARROWS

Word meaning 5..................... is derived from the bird’s name suited to atmosphere of
London because of tendency to rapidly 6..................... always likely to reproduce close to
7..................... characteristic noted: 8..................... because of attitude of people in
London make a sound that seems to he a kind of 9.....................


Question 10-13

Classify the following as being stated of

A pigeons
B wood pigeons

C sparrows

D chaffinches

E blackbirds

F rooks

Write the correct letter A-F in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet.

10..................... They are happier with people when they are in rural areas.
11..................... They rapidly became comfortable being with people.

12..................... They used to congregate particularly at old buildings.
13..................... They used to be attacked by people.

Solution:

1. rockdoves 8. sociability
2. stale bread 9. interrogation

3. fly(-)lines 10. D
4. building work;
11. B
tree(-)felling
5. friend 12. F

6. lose body heat 13. A
7. (an) occupied
building
