TITLE: The Cane Toad in Australia
INDEX: 441
============================================================

The Cane Toad in Australia

Paragraph A

The cane toad was introduced into Australia in 1935 to control sugar cane pests in
Queensland. One hundred and one cane toads arnved at Edmonton in June in 1935.
Breeding occurred almost immediately. The cane toad is tough and adaptable, as well as
being poisonous throughout Its life cycle, and has few predators in Australia.

Paragraph B

Cane toads are large heavily-built amphibians with dry, warty skin. They have a bony head
and over their eyes are bony ndges that meet above the nose They sit upright and move in
short rapid hops. Their hind feet have leathery webbing between the toes and their front
feet are unwebbed. Adult cane toads have large swellings - the parotoid glands - on each
shoulder behind the eardrum. Cane toads may be grey, yellowish, olive-brown or reddish-
brown, and their bellies are pale with dark mottling. Average-sized adults are ten to fifteen
centimetres long. The largest female measured in Queensland was twenty-four centimetres
long and weighed one point three kilograms Male cane toads are smaller and wartier than
females. Dunng the breeding season males develop dark lumps (nuptial pads) on their first
two fingers; these help them cling to a female while mating. Their mating call is a long loud
purnng tnll. Cane toad spawn is exclusive in Australia. It is laid in long strings of
transparent jelly enclosing double rows of black eggs The spawn tangles in dense dark
masses around water plants, and hangs in ropy strands if picked up

Paragraph c

The natural range of cane toads extends from the southern United States to tropical South
Amenca. In 2002, cane toads occurred throughout the eastern and northern half of
Queensland and have extended their range to the river catchments surrounding Kakadu
National Park in the Northern Temtory. In New South Wales, they occur as far south as
Yamba and Port Macquarie.

Paragraph D

Cane toads tolerate a broad range of environmental and climatic conditions and appear to
be able to adjust and survive in almost any environment system, including sea water for
short penods of time. This to a large extent explains their success in their spreading in
Australia. Cane toads are found in environments ranging from sand dunes and coastal
heath to the margins of rainforest and mangroves. They are most abundant in open
clearings in urban areas, and in grassland and woodland.

Paragraph E
Cane toads eat almost anything they can swallow, including pet food, carrion and
household scraps, but most of their food consists of living insects Beetles, honey bees.
ants, winged termites, cnckets and bugs are eaten in abundance Marine snails, smaller
toads and native
frogs, small snakes, and small mammals are occasionally eaten by cane toads. The
tadpoles of cane toads eat algae and other aquatic plants which they rasp off with five rows
of tiny peg-like teeth. They also filter organic matter from the water. Large tadpoles
sometimes eat cane toad eggs

Paragraph F

Cane toads were introduced to Australia to eat French s Cane Beetle and the Greyback
Cane Beetle The whitegrub larvae of these beetles eat the roots of sugar cane and kill or
stunt the plants. The Australian Bureau of Sugar Experimental Stations imported about a
hundred toads from Hawaii to the Meringa Experimental Station near Cairns. The toads
bred quickly and more than three thousand were released in the sugar cane plantations of
north Queensland in July 1935. At that time, some naturalists and scientists warned of the
dangers of liberating cane toads in Australia. Their protests resulted in a brief moratohum
on the release of toads, but releases resumed in 1936. The protestors were right. Firstly,
cane toads compete for the resources of native animals, like food, which affects native
populations. Secondly, cane toads don't have as many established predators as native
animals and so their population grows quickly. Finally, some native animals who would
normally feed on frogs try to eat toads and get poisoned.

Paragraph G

All stages of the cane toad's life-cycle are poisonous. No humans have died in Australia
from cane toad poison, but overseas, people have died after eating toads and even soup
made from boiled toad eggs Cane toads are also poisonous to pets. In Hawaii, up to fifty
dogs a year have died after having cane toads in their mouths Signs of dogs being
poisoned through ingestion include profuse salivation, twitching, vomiting, shallow
breathing, and collapse of the hind limbs. Death may occur by cardiac arrest within fifteen
minutes. A cane toad responds to threat by turning side-on so Its parotoid glands are
directed towards the attacker. The poison usually oozes out of the glands, but toads can
squirt a fine spray for a short distance if they want. The poison is absorbed through mucous
membranes such as eyes, mouth and nose, and in humans may cause intense pain,
temporary blindness and inflammation

Questions 1-6

The reading passage The Cane Toad in Australia has paragraphs (A - G).

From the list of headings below (i - X) choose the most suitable headings for paragraphs B
- G

Write the appropriate number (i - X) in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.

NB There are more headings than paragraphs, so you will not use them all
Example Answer

Paragraph A v
i Diet
ii Habitat
iii Pollution Effects
iv Danger
V Arrival In Australia

Vi Food for Snakes
vii Identification
viii Captivity
ix Distribution
x Environmental Impacts

1...........
Paragraph B
..........
2...........
Paragraph C
..........
3...........
Paragraph D
..........
4...........
Paragraph E
..........
5...........
Paragraph F
..........
6...........
Paragraph G
..........

Questions 7-10
Reading Passage The Cane Toad in Australia, has 7 paragraphs (A - G). Which
paragraphs offer information on the following ideas? Write the appropriate letters (A - G) in
boxes 7-10 on your answer sheet.

7..................... Male cane toads grow protuberances dunng mating penods.

8..................... The cane toad's unique way of laying eggs in Australia.

9..................... Opposition to Vie introduction of cane toads in Australia.

10..................... The danger of eating cane toad eggs


Questions 11-13

Complete each of the following statements (Questions 11-13) with words taken from the
box below.

Write your answers in boxes 38 - 40 on your answer sheet.

11. When suspended, the eggs of the cane toad resemble 11.....................
12. Cane toads were introduced into Australia in order to stop beetle young eating sugar
cane 12.....................
13. The text says that dogs affected by cane toad poisoning may have problems
with 13.....................
flowers heanng hair walking
leaves roots smelling tadpoles
stalks rope seeds sleeping

Solution:

1. vii 8. B
2. ix 9. F

3. ii 10. G
4. i 11. Rope

5. x 12. Roots
6. iv 13. walking

7. B
