TITLE: The creation of lasting memories
INDEX: 448
============================================================

The creation of lasting memories

Many studies of the brain processes underlying the creation of memory consolidation
(lasting memories) have involved giving various human and animal subjects treatment,
while training them to perform a task. These have contributed greatly to our understanding.

In pioneering studies using goldfish, Bernard Agranoff found that protein synthesis
inhibitors injected after training caused the goldfish to forget what they had learned. In
other experiments, he administered protein synthesis inhibitors immediately before the fish
were trained. The remarkable finding was that the fish learned the task completely
normally, but forgot it within a few hours - that is, the protein synthesis inhibitors blocked
memory consolidation, but did not influence short-term memory.
There is now extensive evidence that short-term memory is spared by many kinds of
treatments, including electro-convulsive therapy (ECT), that block memory consolidation.
On the other hand, and equally importantly, neuroscientist Ivan Izquierdo found that many
drug treatments can block short-term memory without blocking memory consolidation.
Contrary to the hypothesis put forward by Canadian psychologist Donald Hebb, in 1949,
long-term memory does not require short-term memory, and vice versa.

Such findings suggest that our experiences create parallel, and possibly independent
stages of memory, .each with a different life span. All of this evidence from clinical and
experimental studies strongly indicates that the brain handles recent and remote memory in
different ways; but why does it do that?

We obviously need to have memory that is created rapidly: reacting to an ever and rapidly
changing environment requires that. For example, most current building codes require that
the heights of all steps in a staircase be equal. After taking a couple of steps, up or down,
we implicitly remember the heights of the steps and assume that the others will be the
same. If they are not the same, we are very likely to trip and fall. Lack of this kind of rapidly
created implicit memory would be bad for us and for insurance companies, but perhaps
good for lawyers. It would be of little value to us if we remembered the heights of the steps
only after a delay of many hours, when the memory becomes consolidated.

The hypothesis that lasting memory consolidates slowly over time is supported primarily by
clinical and experimental evidence that the formation of long-term memory is influenced by
treatments and disorders affecting brain functioning. There are also other kinds of evidence
indicating more directly that the memories consolidate over time after learning. Avi Kami
and Dov Sagi reported that the performance of human subjects trained in a visual skill did
not improve until eight hours after the training was completed, and that improvement was
even greater the following day. Furthermore, the skill was retained for several years.

Studies using human brain imaging to study changes in neural activity induced by learning
have also reported that the changes continue to develop for hours after learning. In an
innovative study using functional imaging of the brain, Reza Shadmehr and Henry Holcomb
examined brain activity in several brain regions shortly after human subjects were trained in
a motor learning task requiring arm and hand movements. They found that while the
performance of the subjects remained stable for several hours after completion of the
training, their brain activity did not; different regions of the brain were predominantly active
at different times over a period of several hours after the training. The activity shifted from
the prefrontal cortex to two areas known to be involved in controlling movements, the motor
cortex and cerebellar cortex. Consolidation of the motor skill appeared to involve activation
of different neural systems that increased the stability of the brain processes underlying the
skill.

There is also evidence that learning-induced changes in the activity of neurons in the
cerebral cortex continue to increase for many days after the training. In an extensive series
of studies using rats with electrodes implanted in the auditory cortex, Norman Weinberger
reported that, after a tone of specific frequency was paired a few times with footshock,
neurons in the rats’ auditory cortex responded more to that specific tone and less to other
tones of other frequencies. Even more interestingly, the selectivity of the neurons’ response
to the specific tone used in training continued to increase for several days after the training
was terminated.

It is not intuitively obvious why our lasting memories consolidate slowly. Certainly, one can
wonder why we have a form of memory that we have to rely on for many hours, days or a
lifetime, that is so susceptible to disruption shortly after it is initiated. Perhaps the brain
system that consolidates long-term memory over time was a late development in vertebrate
evolution. Moreover, maybe we consolidate memories slowly because our mammalian
brains are large and enormously complex. We can readily reject these ideas. All species of
animals studied to date have both short and long-term memory; and all are susceptible to
retrograde amnesia. Like humans, birds, bees, and molluscs, as well as fish and rats, make
long-term memory slowly. Consolidation of memory clearly emerged early in evolution, and
was conserved.

Although there seems to be no compelling reason to conclude that a biological system
such as a brain could not quickly make a lasting memory, the fact is that animal brains do
not. Thus, memory consolidation must serve some very important adaptive function or
functions. There is considerable evidence suggesting that the slow consolidation is
adaptive because it enables neurobiological processes occurring shortly after learning to
influence the strength of memory for experiences. The extensive evidence that memory
can be enhanced, as well as impaired, by treatments administered shortly after training,
provides intriguing support for this hypothesis.

Questions 1-5

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

1 Experiments by Bernard Agranoff described in Reading Passage 3 involved

A injecting goldfish at different stages of the experiments.

B training goldfish to do different types of task.

C using different types of treatment on goldfish.
D comparing the performance of different goldfish on certain tasks.


2 Most findings from recent studies suggest that

A drug treatments do not normally affect short-term memories.

B long-term memories build upon short-term memories.

C short and long-term memories are formed by separate processes.

D ECT treatment affects both short-and long-term memories.


3 In the fifth paragraph, what does the writer want to show by the example of
staircases?
A Prompt memory formation underlies the performance of everyday tasks.

B Routine tasks can be carried out unconsciously.

C Physical accidents can impair the function of memory.

D Complex information such as regulations cannot be retained by the memory.


4 Observations about memory by Kami and Sagi

A cast doubt on existing hypotheses.

B related only to short-term memory.
C were based on tasks involving hearing.

D confirmed other experimental findings.


5 What did the experiment by Shadmehr and Holcomb show?

A Different areas of the brain were activated by different tasks.

B Activity in the brain gradually moved from one area to other areas.
C Subjects continued to get better at a task after training had finished.

D Treatment given to subjects improved their performance on a task.


Questions 6-10

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage?

Write

YES if the statement agrees with the views of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the views of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this


6..................... The training which Kami and Sagi’s subjects were given was repeated
over several days.

7..................... The rats in Weinberger’s studies learned to associate a certain sound
with a specific experience.

8..................... The results of Weinberger’s studies indicated that the strength of the
rats’ learned associations increases with time.

9..................... It is easy to see the evolutionary advantage of the way lasting
memories in humans are created.

10..................... Long-term memories in humans are more stable than in many other
species.


Questions 11-14

Complete the summary using the list of words, A-l, below


Long-term memory

Various researchers have examined the way lasting memories are formed. Laboratory
experiments usually involve teaching subjects to do something 11..................... and
treating them with mild electric shocks or drugs. Other studies monitor behaviour after a
learning experience, or use sophisticated equipment to observe brain activity.

The results are generally consistent: they show that lasting memories are the result of a
12..................... and complex biological process.

The fact that humans share this trait with other species, including animals with
13..................... brains, suggests that it developed 14..................... in our evolutionary
history.
A
C D E
e B
lar lat leng
ar easy
ge e thy
ly
F H I
G
n s qu
rece
e m ic
ntly
w all k

Solution:

1. A 8. YES
2. C 9. NO

3. A 10. NOT GIVEN
4. D 11. F

5. B 12. E
6. NOT GIVEN 13. H

7. YES 14. A
