TITLE: The Development of Museums
INDEX: 451
============================================================

The Development of Museums

A

The conviction that historical relics provide infallible testimony about the past is rooted in
the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, when science was regarded as objective and
value free. As one writer observes: 'Although it is now evident that artefacts are as easily
altered as chronicles, public faith in their veracity endures: a tangible relic seems ipso facto
real.' Such conviction was, until recently, reflected in museum displays. Museums used to
look - and some still do - much like storage rooms of objects packed together in
showcases: good for scholars who wanted to study the subtle differences in design, but not
for the ordinary visitor, to whom it all looked alike. Similarly, the information accompanying
the objects often made little sense to the lay visitor. The content and format of explanations
dated back to a time when the museum was the exclusive domain of the scientific
researcher.

B

Recently, however, attitudes towards history and the way it should be presented have
altered. The key word in heritage display is now 'experience', the more exciting the better
and, if possible, involving all the senses. Good examples of this approach in the UK are the
Jorvik Centre in York; the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television in
Bradford; and the Imperial War Museum in London. In the US the trend emerged much
earlier: Williamsburg has been a prototype for many heritage developments in other parts
of the world. No one can predict where the process will end. On so-called heritage sites the
re-enactment of historical events is increasingly popular, and computers will soon provide
virtual reality experiences, which will present visitors with a vivid image of the period of their
choice, in which they themselves can act as if part of the historical environment. Such
developments have been criticised as an intolerable vulgarisation, but the success of many
historical theme parks and similar locations suggests that the majority of the public does
not share this opinion.

C

In a related development, the sharp distinction between museum and heritage sites on the
one hand, and theme parks on the other, is gradually evaporating. They already borrow
ideas and concepts from one another. For example, museums have adopted story lines for
exhibitions, sites have accepted 'theming'as a relevant tool, and theme parks are moving
towards more authenticity and research-based presentations. In zoos, animals are no
longer kept in cages, but in great spaces, either in the open air or in enormous
greenhouses, such as the jungle and desert environments in Burgers'Zoo in Holland. This
particular trend is regarded as one of the major developments in the presentation of natural
history in the twentieth century.
D

Theme parks are undergoing other changes, too, as they try to present more serious social
and cultural issues, and move away from fantasy. This development is a response to
market forces and, although museums and heritage sites have a special, rather distinct,
role to fulfil, they are also operating in a very competitive environment, where visitors make
choices on how and where to spend their free time. Heritage and museum experts do not
have to invent stories and recreate historical environments to attract their visitors: their
assets are already in place. However, exhibits must be both based on artefacts and facts
as we know them, and attractively presented. Those who are professionally engaged in the
art of interpreting history are thus in a difficult position, as they must steer a narrow course
between the demands of 'evidence' and 'attractiveness', especially given the increasing
need in the heritage industry for income-generating activities.

E
It could be claimed that in order to make everything in heritage more 'real', historical
accuracy must be increasingly altered. For example, Pithecanthropus erectus is depicted in
an Indonesian museum with Malay facial features, because this corresponds to public
perceptions. Similarly, in the Museum of Natural History in Washington, Neanderthal man
is shown making a dominant gesture to his wife. Such presentations tell us more about
contemporary perceptions of the world than about our ancestors. There is one
compensation, however, for the professionals who make these interpretations: if they did
not provide the interpretation, visitors would do it for themselves, based on their own ideas,
misconceptions and prejudices. And no matter how exciting the result, it would contain a lot
more bias than the presentations provided by experts.

F

Human bias is inevitable, but another source of bias in the representation of history has to
do with the transitory nature of the materials themselves. The simple fact is that not
everything from history survives the historical process. Castles, palaces and cathedrals
have a longer lifespan than the dwellings of ordinary people. The same applies to the
furnishings and other contents of the premises. In a town like Leyden in Holland, which in
the seventeenth century was occupied by approximately the same number of inhabitants
as today, people lived within the walled town, an area more than five times smaller than
modern Leyden. In most of the houses several families lived together in circumstances
beyond our imagination. Yet in museums, fine period rooms give only an image of the
lifestyle of the upper class of that era. No wonder that people who stroll around exhibitions
are filled with nostalgia; the evidence in museums indicates that life was so much better in
the past. This notion is induced by the bias in its representation in museums and heritage
centres.

Questions 1-4

Reading Passage has six paragraphs, A-F.

Choose the correct heading for paragraphs B-E from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-vii, in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.


List of
Headings
i
Commer
cial
pressures
on people
in charge
ii Mixed
views on
current
changes to
museums
iii
Interpreti
Example Answer
ng the
facts to
Paragraph A v
meet
visitor
1 Paragraph B 1.....................
expectatio
2 Paragraph C 2.....................
ns
3 Paragraph D 3..................... iv The
internation
4 Paragraph E 4.....................
al
dimension
v
Collectio
ns of
factual
evidence
vi Fewer
differences
between
public
attractions
vii
Current
reviews
and
suggestion
s


Questions 5-10

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 5-10 on your answer sheet.


5 Compared with today’s museums, those of the past

A did not present history in a detailed way.

B were not primarily intended for the public.
C were more clearly organised.

D preserved items with greater care.


6 According to the writer, current trends in the heritage industry

A emphasise personal involvement.

B have their origins in York and London.

C rely on computer images.

D reflect minority tastes.


7 The writer says that museums, heritage sites and theme parks

A often work in close partnership.

B try to preserve separate identities.

C have similar exhibits.

D are less easy to distinguish than before.


8 The writer says that in preparing exhibits for museums, experts
A should pursue a single objective.
B have to do a certain amount of language translation.

C should be free from commercial constraints.

D have to balance conflicting priorities.


9 In paragraph E, the writer suggests that some museum exhibits
A fail to match visitor expectations.

B are based on the false assumptions of professionals.

C reveal more about present beliefs than about the past.

D allow visitors to make more use of their imagination.


10 The passage ends by noting that our view of history is biased because

A we fail to use our imagination.

B only very durable objects remain from the past.
C we tend to ignore things that displease us.

D museum exhibits focus too much on the local area.


Questions 11-14

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?

In boxes 11-14 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this

11..................... Consumers prefer theme parks which avoid serious issues.

12..................... More people visit museums than theme parks.

13..................... The boundaries of Leyden have changed little since the seventeenth
century.

14..................... Museums can give a false impression of how life used to be.

Solution:

1. ii 8. D
2. vi 9. C

3. i 10. B
4. iii 11. FALSE

5. B 12. NOT GIVEN
6. A 13. FALSE

7. D 14. TRUE
