TITLE: The Development of Plastics
INDEX: 452
============================================================

The Development of Plastics

When rubber was first commercially produced in Europe during the nineteenth century, it
rapidly became a very important commodity, particularly in the fields of transportation and
electricity. However, during the twentieth century a number of new synthetic materials,
called plastics, superseded natural rubber in all but a few applications.

Rubber is a polymer—a compound containing large molecules that are formed by the
bonding of many smaller, simpler units, repeated over and over again. The same bonding
principle—polymerization—underlies the creation of a huge range of plastics by the
chemical industry.

The first plastic was developed as a result of a competition in the USA. In the 1860s,
$10,000 was offered to anybody who could replace ivory—supplies of which were
declining—with something equally good as a material for making billiard balls. The prize
was won by John Wesley Hyatt with a material called celluloid. Celluloid was made by
dissolving cellulose, a carbohydrate derived from plants, in a solution of camphor dissolved
in ethanol. This new material rapidly found uses in the manufacture of products such as
knife handles, detachable collars and cuffs, spectacle frames and photographic film.
Without celluloid, the film industry could never have got off the ground at the end of the
19th century.

Celluloid can be repeatedly softened and reshaped by heat, and is known as a
thermoplastic. In 1907, Leo Baekeland, a Belgian chemist working in the USA, invented a
different kind of plastic, by causing phenol and formaldehyde to react together. Baekeland
called the material Bakelite, and it was the first of the thermosets—plastics that can be cast
and moulded while hot, but cannot be softened by heat and reshaped once they have set.
Bakelite was a good insulator, and was resistant to water, acids and moderate heat. With
these properties it was soon being used in the manufacture of switches, household items
such as knife handles, and electrical components for cars.

Soon chemists began looking for other small molecules that could be strung together to
make polymers. In the 1930s British chemists discovered that the gas ethylene would
polymerize under heat and pressure to form a thermoplastic they called polythene.
Polypropylene followed in the 1950s. Both were used to make bottles, pipes and plastic
bags. A small change in the starting material—replacing a hydrogen atom in ethylene with
a chlorine atom—produced PVC (polyvinyl chloride), a hard, fireproof plastic suitable for
drains and gutters. And by adding certain chemicals, a soft form of PVC could be
produced, suitable as a substitute for rubber in items such as waterproof clothing. A closely
related plastic was Teflon, or PTFE (polytetrafluoroethylene). This had a very low
coefficient of friction, making it ideal for bearings, rollers, and non-stick frying pans.
Polystyrene, developed during the 1930s in Germany, was a clear, glass-like material,
used in food containers, domestic appliances and toys. Expanded polystyrene—a white,
rigid foam—was widely used in packaging and insulation. Polyurethanes, also developed in
Germany, found uses as adhesives, coatings, and—in the form of rigid foams—as
insulation materials. They are all produced from chemicals derived from crude oil, which
contains exactly the same elements—carbon and hydrogen—as many plastics.

The first of the man-made fibres, nylon, was also created in the 1930s. Its inventor was a
chemist called Wallace Carothers, who worked for the Du Pont company in the USA. He
found that under the right conditions, two chemicals— hexamethylenediamine and adipic
acid—would form a polymer that could be pumped out through holes and then stretched to
form long glossy threads that could be woven like silk. Its first use was to make parachutes
for the US armed forces in World War H. In the post-war years nylon completely replaced
silk in the manufacture of stockings. Subsequently many other synthetic fibres joined nylon,
including Orion, Acrilan and Terylene. Today most garments are made of a blend of natural
fibres, such as cotton and wool, and man-made fibres that make fabrics easier to look after.

The great strength of plastic is its indestructibility. However, this quality is also something of
a drawback: beaches all over the world, even on the remotest islands, are littered with
plastic bottles that nothing can destroy. Nor is it very easy to recycle plastics, as different
types of plastic are often used in the same items and call for different treatments. Plastics
can be made biodegradable by incorporating into their structure a material such as starch,
which is attacked by bacteria and causes the plastic to fall apart. Other materials can be
incorporated that gradually decay in sunlight—although bottles made of such materials
have to be stored in the dark, to ensure that they do not disintegrate before they have been
used.

Questions 1-7

Complete the table below

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from the passages for each answer

Write your answer in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet.

Name of Date of Original
Property Common use
plastic invention region
Celluloid 1860s US 1.....................


3.....................
Can be cast and moulded
2....................
1907 US but cannot be softened by
. household
heat
items and car
parts
4............
Polythene 1930 Bottles
.........
Rigid PVC 5.....................

German
Polystyrene 1930s 6..................... Food container
y
Adhesives,
Polyurethane German
7..................... foams coatings and
s y
insulation

Questions 8-13

Do the following statements agree with the information in Reading Passage?

In boxes 8-13 on your answer sheet write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information about the statement

8..................... The chemical structure of plastic is very different from that of rubber.

9..................... John Wesley was a famous chemist.

10..................... Celluloid and Bakelite react to heat in the same way.
11..................... The mix of different varieties of plastic can make the recycling more
difficult.
12..................... Adding starch into plastic can make plastic more durable.

13..................... Some plastic containers have to be preserved in special conditions.

Solution:

1. photographic film 8. FALSE
2. Bakelite 9. NOT GIVEN

3. switches 10. FALSE
4. Britain/UK 11. TRUE

5. fireproof 12. FALSE
6. clear and glass-like 13. TRUE

7. rigid
