TITLE: The Dinosaurs Footprints and Extinction
INDEX: 455
============================================================

The Dinosaurs Footprints and Extinction

A

EVERYBODY knows that the dinosaurs were killed by an asteroid. Something big hit the
earth 65 million years ago and, when the dust had fallen, so had the great reptiles. There is
thus a nice if ironic, symmetry in the idea that a similar impact brought about the dinosaurs’
rise. That is the thesis proposed by Paul Olsen, of Columbia University, and his colleagues
in this week’s Science.

B
Dinosaurs first appeared in the fossil record 230m years ago, during the Triassic period.

But they were mostly small, and they shared the earth with lots of other sorts of reptile. It
was in the subsequent Jurassic, which began 202 million years ago, that they overran the
planet and turned into the monsters depicted in the book and movie “Jurassic Park”.
(Actually, though, the dinosaurs that appeared on screen were from the still more recent
Cretaceous period.) Dr Olsen and his colleagues are not the first to suggest that the
dinosaurs inherited the earth as the result of an asteroid strike. But they are the first to
show that the takeover did, indeed, happen in a geological eyeblink.

C

Dinosaur skeletons are rare. Dinosaur footprints are, however, surprisingly abundant. And
the sizes of the prints are as good an indication of the sizes of the beasts as are the
skeletons themselves. Dr Olsen and his colleagues, therefore, concentrated on prints, not
bones.

D

The prints in question were made in eastern North America, a part of the world the full of rift
valleys to those in East Africa today. Like the modern African rift valleys, the
Triassic/Jurassic American ones contained lakes, and these lakes grew and shrank at
regular intervals because of climatic changes caused by periodic shifts in the earth’s orbit.
(A similar phenomenon is responsible for modern ice ages.) That regularity, combined with
reversals in the earth’s magnetic field, which are detectable in the tiny fields of certain
magnetic minerals, means that rocks from this place and period can be dated to within a
few thousand years. As a bonus, squishy lake-edge sediments are just the things for
recording the tracks of passing animals. By dividing the labour between themselves, the
ten authors of the paper were able to study such tracks at 80 sites.

E

The researchers looked at 18 so-called ichnotaxa. These are recognizable types of the
footprint that cannot be matched precisely with the species of animal that left them. But
they can be matched with a general sort of animal, and thus act as an indicator of the fate
of that group, even when there are no bones to tell the story. Five of the ichnotaxa
disappear before the end of the Triassic, and four march confidently across the boundary
into the Jurassic. Six, however, vanish at the boundary, or only just splutter across it; and
there appear from nowhere, almost as soon as the Jurassic begins.

F
That boundary itself is suggestive. The first geological indication of the impact that killed
the dinosaurs was an unusually high level of iridium in rocks at the end of the Cretaceous
when the beasts disappear from the fossil record. Iridium is normally rare at the earth’s
surface, but it is more abundant in meteorites. When people began to believe the impact
theory, they started looking for other Cretaceous-and anomalies. One that turned up was a
surprising abundance of fern spores in rocks just above the boundary layer – a
phenomenon known as a “fern spike”.

G
That matched the theory nicely. Many modern ferns are opportunists. They cannot
compete against plants with leaves, but if a piece of land is cleared by, say, a volcanic
eruption, they are often the first things to set up shop there. An asteroid strike would have
scoured much of the earth of its vegetable cover, and provided a paradise for ferns. A fern
spike in the rocks is thus a good indication that something terrible has happened.

H

Both an iridium anomaly and a fern spike appear in rocks at the end of the Triassic, too.
That accounts for the disappearing ichnotaxa: the creatures that made them did not survive
the holocaust. The surprise is how rapidly the new ichnotaxa appear.

I

Dr Olsen and his colleagues suggest that the explanation for this rapid increase in size may
be a phenomenon called ecological release. This is seen today when reptiles (which, in
modern times, tend to be small creatures) reach islands where they face no competitors.
The most spectacular example is on the Indonesian island of Komodo, where local lizards
have grown so large that they are often referred to as dragons. The dinosaurs, in other
words, could flourish only when the competition had been knocked out.

J

That leaves the question of where the impact happened. No large hole in the earth’s crust
seems to be 202m years old. It may, of course, have been overlooked. Old craters are
eroded and buried, and not always easy to find. Alternatively, it may have vanished.
Although the continental crust is more or less permanent, the ocean floor is constantly
recycled by the tectonic processes that bring about continental drift. There is no ocean floor
left that is more than 200m years old, so a crater that formed in the ocean would have been
swallowed up by now.

K

There is a third possibility, however. This is that the crater is known, but has been
misdated. The Manicouagan “structure”, a crater in Quebec, is thought to be 214m years
old. It is huge – some 100km across – and seems to be the largest of between three and
five craters that formed within a few hours of each other as the lumps of a disintegrated
comet hit the earth one by one.

Questions 1-6

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?

In boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement is true

NO if the statement is false

NOT GIVEN if the information is not given in the passage


1..................... Dr Paul Olsen and his colleagues believe that asteroid knock may also
lead to dinosaurs’ boom.


2..................... Books and movie like Jurassic Park often exaggerate the size of the
dinosaurs.


3..................... Dinosaur footprints are more adequate than dinosaur skeletons.

4..................... The prints were chosen by Dr Olsen to study because they are more
detectable than the earth magnetic field to track the date of geological precise within
thousands of years.

5..................... Ichnotaxa showed that footprints of dinosaurs offer exact information of the
trace left by an individual species.

6..................... We can find more Iridium in the earth’s surface than in meteorites.


Questions 7-13

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage

Using NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 7-13 on your answer sheet.


Dr Olsen and his colleagues applied a phenomenon named 7..................... to explain the
large size of the Eubrontes, which is a similar case to that nowadays reptiles invade a
place where there are no 8.....................; for example, on an island called Komodo,
indigenous huge lizards grow so big that people even regarding them as 9.....................

However, there were no old impact trace being found? The answer may be that we
have 10...................... the evidence. Old craters are difficult to spot or it
probably 11...................... Due to the effect of the earth moving. Even a crater formed in
Ocean had been 12..................... under the impact of crust movement. Besides, the third
hypothesis is that the potential evidence – some craters maybe 13......................
4

Solution:

1. YES 8. competitors
2. NOT GIVEN 9. dragons

3. YES 10. overlooked
4. NOT GIVEN 11. (have) vanished

5. NO 12. swallowed up
6. NO 13. misdated

7. ecological
release
