TITLE: The discovery of a baby mammoth
INDEX: 456
============================================================

The discovery of a baby mammoth

A near-perfect frozen mammoth offers clues to a great vanished species

A On a May morning in 2007, on the Yamal Peninsula in northwestern Siberia, a Nenets
reindeer herder named Yuri Khudi stood on a sandbar on the Yuribey River, looking
carefully at a diminutive corpse. Although he'd never seen such an animal before, Khudi
had seen many mammoth tusks, the thick corkscrew shafts that his people found each
summer, and this persuaded him the corpse was a baby mammoth. It was eerily well
preserved. Apart from its missing hair and toenails, it was perfectly intact. Khudi realised
the find might be significant and he knew he couldn't just return home and forget all about
it. He therefore decided to travel to the small town of Yar Sale to consult an old friend
named Kirill Serotetto. His friend took him to meet the director of the local museum, who
persuaded the local authorities to fly Khudi and Serotetto back to the Yuribey River to
collect the baby mammoth.

B Mammoths became extinct between 14,000 and 10,000 years ago and since the
extinctions coincided with the end of the most recent Ice age, many researchers believe
that the primary cause of the great die-off was the sharp rise in temperature, which
dramatically altered the vegetation. 'We have strong evidence that the temperature rise
played a significant part in their extinction.’ says Adrian Lister, a palaeontologist and
mammoth expert at London's Natural History Museum. 'In Eurasia, the timing of the two
events matches closely.' The extinctions also coincided, however, with the arrival of
modern humans. In addition to exploiting mammoths for food, they used their bones and
tusks to make weapons, tools, and even dwellings. Some scientists believe humans were
as much to blame as the temperature rise for the great die-off. Some say they caused it.

C The body of the baby mammoth was eventually sent to the st Petersburg Zoological
Museum in Russia. Alexei Tikhonov, the museum's director, was one of the first scientists
to view the baby, a female. According to Tikhonov, Khudi had rescued 'the best preserved
mammoth to come down to US from the Ice Age', and he gratefully named her Lyuba, after
Khudi's wife. Tikhonov knew that no-one would be more excited by the find than Dan
Fisher, an American colleague at the University of Michigan who had spent 30 years
researching the lives of mammoths. Tikhonov invited Fisher, along with Bernard Buigues, a
French mammoth hunter, to come and view the baby mammoth. Fisher and Buigues had
examined other specimens together, including infants, but these had been in a relatively
poor state. Lyuba was another story entirely, other than the missing hair and toenails, the
only flaw in her pristine appearance was a curious dent above the trunk.

D Fisher was particularly excited about one specific part of Lyuba's anatomy: her milk
tusks. Through his career, Fisher has taken hundreds of tusk samples. Most of these came
from the Great Lakes region of North America, and his research showed that these animals
continued to thrive, despite the late Pleistocene* temperature change. On the other hand,
Pleistocene era: the time between roughly 2.6 million years ago and 10.000 years ago to
Fisher the tusks often revealed telltale evidence of human hunting. His samples frequently
came from animals that had died in the autumn, when they should have been at their peak
after summer grazing, and less likely to die of natural causes, but also when humans would
have been most eager to stockpile meat for the coming winter. He has done limited work in

Siberia, but his analysis of tusks from Wrangel Island, off the coast of Siberia, suggests the
same conclusion.

E In December 2007, Buigues arranged for the specimen to be transported to Japan to
undergo a CT scan by Naoki Suzuki of the Jikei University School of Medicine. The test
confirmed her skeleton was undamaged, and her internal organs seemed largely intact. It
also showed that the end of her trunk, and her throat, mouth, and windpipe were filled with
dense sediment. Six months later, in a laboratory in st Petersburg, Fisher, Buigues, Suzuki,
Tikhonov and other colleagues began a three-day series of tests on Lyuba. During these,

Fisher noted a dense mix of clay and sand in her trunk, mouth and throat, which had been
indicated earlier by the scan. In fact, the sediment in Lyuba's trunk was packed so tightly
that Fisher saw it as a possible explanation for the dent above her trunk. If she was
frantically fighting for breath and inhaled convulsively, perhaps a partial vacuum was
created in the base of her trunk, which would have flattened surrounding soft tissue. To
Fisher, the circumstances of Lyuba's death were clear: she had asphyxiated. Suzuki,
however, proposed a different interpretation, seeing more evidence for drowning than
asphyxiation.

F Studies are ongoing, but Lyuba has begun to shed the secrets of her short life and some
clues to the fate of her kind. Her good general health was shown in the record of her dental
development, a confirmation for Fisher that dental research is useful for evaluating health
and thus key to investigating the causes of mammoth extinction. Analysis of her well-
preserved DNA has revealed that she belonged to a distinct population of Mammuthus
primigenius and that, soon after her time, another population migrating to Siberia from
North America would take their place. Finally, Lyuba's premolars and tusks revealed that
she had been born in late spring and was only a month old when she died.

Questions 1-5

Reading Passage has six paragraphs, A-F.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter, A-F, in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.

1..................... Similarities between studies of mammoth remains from different parts of the
world.

2..................... Details of the uses to which mammoth body parts were put.

3..................... A theory that accounts for the damage to lyuba’s face.
4..................... An explanation of how an individual was able to identify a small corpse.

5..................... A comparison between lyuba and other young mammoth corpses.


Questions 6-10

Look at the following statements (Questions 6-10) and the list of people below.
Match each statement with the correct person, A-G.

Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 6-10 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.

6..................... The indications are that mammoths died as a result of climate change.

7..................... Teeth analysis is important in discovering why mammoths died out.

8..................... The corpse of the baby mammoth is in better condition than any other that
has been discovered.

9..................... It would be a mistake to ignore the baby mammoth’s discovery, because of
its potential importance.

10..................... Mammoths often died at a time of year when they should have been in
good physical condition.
List of People

A Yuri Khudi
Kirill
B
Serotetto
c Adrian Lister

Alexei
D
Tikhonov
E Dan Fisher
Bermard
F
Buigues
G Naoki Suzuki


Questions 11-13

Complete the sentences below.

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet.

11. Some researchers say that a marked rise in temperature impacted on mammoths by
changing the type of 11..................... available.

12. Fisher concluded that many of the mammoth tusks he looked at displayed signs of
12......................

13. Not long after Lyuba’s death, the Mammuthus primigenius group she belonged to was
replaced by another group that came from 13......................

Solution:

1. D 8. D
2. B 9. A

3. E 10. E
4. A 11. Vegetable

5. C 12. Human hunting
6. C 13. North America

7. E
