TITLE: The Discovery of Uranus
INDEX: 457
============================================================

The Discovery of Uranus

Someone once put forward an attractive though unlikely theory. Throughout the Earth’s
annual revolution around the sun, there is one point of space always hidden from our eyes.
This point is the opposite part of the Earth’s orbit, which is always hidden by the sun. Could
there be another planet there, essentially similar to our own, but always invisible?

If a space probe today sent back evidence that such a world existed it would cause not
much more sensation than Sir William Herschel’s discovery of a new planet, Uranus, in
1781. Herschel was an extraordinary man — no other astronomer has ever covered so
vast a field of work — and his career deserves study. He was born in Hanover in Germany
in 1738, left the German army in 1757, and arrived in England the same year with no
money but quite exceptional music ability. He played the violin and oboe and at one time
was organist in the Octagon Chapel in the city of Bath. Herschel’s was an active mind, and
deep inside he was conscious that music was not his destiny; he therefore, read widely in
science and the arts, but not until 1772 did he come across a book on astronomy. He was
then 34, middle-aged by the standards of the time, but without hesitation he embarked on
his new career, financing it by his professional work as a musician. He spent years
mastering the art of telescope construction, and even by present-day standards his
instruments are comparable with the best.

Serious observation began 1774. He set himself the astonishing task of ‘reviewing the
heavens’, in other words, pointing his telescope to every accessible part of the sky and
recording what he saw. The first review was made in 1775; the second, and most
momentous, in 1780-81. It was during the latter part of this that he discovered Uranus.
Afterwards, supported by the royal grant in recognition of his work, he was able to devote
himself entirely to astronomy. His final achievements spread from the sun and moon to
remote galaxies (of which he discovered hundreds), and papers flooded from his pen until
his death in 1822. Among these, there was one sent to the Royal Society in 1781, entitled
An Account of a Comet. In his own words:

On Tuesday the 13th of March, between ten and eleven in the evening, while I was
examining the small stars in the neighbourhood of H Geminorum, I perceived one that
appeared visibly larger than the rest; being struck with its uncommon magnitude, I
compared it to H Geminorum and the small star in the quartile between Auriga and Gemini,
and finding it to be much larger than either of them, suspected it to be a comet.

Herschel’s care was the hallmark of a great observer; he was not prepared to jump any
conclusions. Also, to be fair, the discovery of a new planet was the last thought in
anybody’s mind. But further observation by other astronomers besides Herschel revealed
two curious facts. For the comet, it showed a remarkably sharp disc; furthermore, it was
moving so slowly that it was thought to be a great distance from the sun, and comets are
only normally visible in the immediate vicinity of the sun. As its orbit came to be worked out
the truth dawned that it was a new planet far beyond Saturn’s realm, and that the ‘reviewer
of the heavens’ had stumbled across an unprecedented prize. Herschel wanted to call it
georgium sidus (Star of George) in honour of his royal patron King George III of Great
Britain. The planet was later for a time called Herschel in honour of its discoverer. The
name Uranus, which was first proposed by the German astronomer Johann Elert Bode,
was in use by the late 19th century.
Uranus is a giant in construction, but not so much in size; its diameter compares
unfavourably with that of Jupiter and Saturn, though on the terrestrial scale it is still
colossal. Uranus’ atmosphere consists largely of hydrogen and helium, with a trace of
methane. Through a telescope the planet appears as a small bluish-green disc with a faint
green periphery. In 1977, while recording the occultation 1 of a star behind the planet, the

American astronomer James L. Elliot discovered the presence of five rings encircling the
equator of Uranus. Four more rings were discovered in January 1986 during the
exploratory flight of Voyager 2 2 , In addition to its rings, Uranus has 15 satellites (‘moons’),
the last 10 discovered by Voyager 2 on the same flight; all revolve about its equator and
move with the planet in an east—west direction. The two largest moons, Titania and
Oberon, were discovered by Herschel in 1787. The next two, Umbriel and Ariel, were found
in 1851 by the British astronomer William Lassell. Miranda, thought before 1986 to be the
innermost moon, was discovered in 1948 by the American astronomer Gerard Peter
Kuiper.

Glossary:
‘Occultation‘ : in astronomy, when one object passes in front of another and hides the
second from view, especially, for example, when the moon comes between an observer
and a star or planet .
‘Voyager 2‘ : an unmanned spacecraft sent on a voyage past Saturn, Uranus and Jupiter
in 1986; during which it sent back information about these planets to scientists on earth .

Questions 1-5
omplete the table below. Write a date for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.

Event Date


Example Answer

William Herschel was born 1738
Herschel began investigating
1.....................
astronomy
Discovery of the planet Uranus 2.....................
Discovery of the moons Titania
3.....................
and Oberon
First discovery of Uranus’ rings 4.....................
Discovery of the last 10 moons of
5.....................
Uranus

Questions 6-10
Do the following statements reflect the claims of the writer of the Reading Passage?
In boxes 6-10 on your answer sheet write

YES if the statement reflects the claims of the writer
NO if the statement contradicts the writer
NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

Example Answer
Herschel was multi-talented YES

6..................... It is improbable that there is a planet hidden behind the sun.
7..................... Herschel knew immediately that he had found a new planet.
8..................... Herschel collaborated with other astronomers of his time.
9..................... Herschel’s newly-discovered object was considered to be too far from the
sun to be a comet.
10..................... Herschel’s discovery was the most important find of the last three
hundred years.


Questions 11-14

Complete each of the following statements (Questions 11-14) with a name from the
Reading Passage.
Write your answers in boxes 11-14 on your answer sheet.

The suggested names of the new planet started with 11....................., then 12.....................,
before finally settling on Uranus. The first five rings around Uranus were discovered
by 13...................... From 1948 until 1986, the moon 14..................... was believed to be
the moon closest to the surface of Uranus.

Solution:

1. 1772 8. NOT GIVEN
2. 1781 9. YES

3. 1787 10. NOT GIVEN
4. 1977 11. georgium sidus

5. 1986 12. Herschel
6. YES 13. James L. Elliot

7. NO 14. Miranda
