TITLE: The Dollar-a-Year Man
INDEX: 458
============================================================

The Dollar-a-Year Man

How John Lomax set out to record American folk music

A In the early 1930s, folklorist, platform lecturer, college professor and former banker John
Avery Lomax was trying to recapture a sense of direction for his life. For two decades he
had enjoyed a national reputation for his pioneering work in collecting and studying
American folk songs; no less a figure than President Theodore Roosevelt had admired his
work, and had written a letter of support for him as he sought grants for his research. He
had always dreamed of finding a way of making a living by doing the thing he loved
best, collecting folk songs, but he was now beginning to wonder if he would ever
realise that dream.
B Lomax wanted to embark on a nationwide collecting project, resulting in as many as four
volumes, and ‘complete the rehabilitation of the American folk-song’. Eventually this was
modified to where he envisioned a single book tentatively called American Ballads and Folk
Sojigs,designed to survey the whole field. It called for firsthand field collecting, and would
especially focus on the neglected area of black folk music.

C In 1932, Lomax travelled to New York, and stopped in to see a man named H.S.
Latham of the Macmillan Company. He informally outlined his plan to Latham, and
read him the text of an earthy African American blues ballad called ‘Ida Red’. Latham
was impressed, and two days later Lomax had a contract, a small check to bind it,
and an agreement to deliver the manuscript about one year later. The spring of 1932
began to look more green, lush and full of promise.

D Lomax immediately set to work. He travelled to libraries at Harvard, the Library of
Congress, Brown University and elsewhere in order to explore unpublished song
collections and to canvas the folk song books published over the past ten years. During his
stay in Washington, D.C., Lomax became friendly with Carl Engel, Music Division chief of
the Library of Congress. Engel felt that Lomax had the necessary background and energy
to someday direct the Archive of Folk Song. Through funds provided by the Council of
Learned Societies and the Library of Congress, Lomax ordered a state-of-the-art portable
recording machine. More importantly, the Library of Congress agreed to furnish blank
records and to lend their name to his collecting; Lomax simply had to agree to deposit
the completed records at the Library of Congress. He did so without hesitation. On July 15,
1933, Lomax was appointed an ‘honorary consultant’ for a dollar a year-.

E Together with his eighteen-year-old son Alan, he began a great adventure to
collect songs for American Ballads and Folk Songs, a task that was to last for
many months. Lomax’s library research had reinforced his belief that a dearth of black folk
song material existed in printed collections. This fact, along with his early appreciation of

African American folk culture, led Lomax to decide that black folk music from rural areas
should be the primary focus. This bold determination resulted in the first major trip in the
United States to capture black folk music in the field. In order to fulfill their quest, the
two men concentrated on sections of the South with a high percentage of blacks. They
also pinpointed laboring camps, particularly lumber camps, which employed blacks almost
exclusively. But as they went along, prisons and penitentiaries also emerged as a focal
point for research.
F The recordings made by the Lomaxes had historical significance. The whole idea
of using a phonograph to preserve authentic folk music was still fairly new. Most of
John Lomax’s peers were involved in collecting-songs the classic way: taking both
words and melody down by hand, asking the singer to perform the song over and
over until the collector had ‘caught’ it on paper. John Lomax sensed at once the
limitations of this kind of method, especially when getting songs from African-
American singers, whose quarter tones, blue notes and complex timing often
frustrated white musicians trying to transcribe them with European notation
systems.

G The whole concept of field recordings was, in 1933 and still is today, radically
different from the popular notion of recording. Field recordings are not intended as
commercial products, but as attempts at cultural preservation. There is no profit motive,
nor any desire to make the singer a ‘star’. As have hundreds of folk song collectors
after him, John Lomax had to persuade his singers to perform, to explain to them why their
songs were important, and to convince the various authorities - the wardens, the trusties,
the bureaucrats - that this was serious, worthwhile work. He faced the moral problem of
how to safeguard the records and the rights of the singers - a problem he solved in this
instance by donating the discs to the Library of Congress. He had to overcome the
technical problems involved in recording outside a studio; one always hoped for quiet, with
no doors slamming or alarms going off, but it was always a risk. His new state-of-the-
art recording machine sported a new microphone designed by NBC, but there were no
wind baffles to help reduce the noise when recording outside. Lomax learned how to
balance sound, where to place microphones, how to work echoes and walls, and soon was
a skilled recordist.

Questions 1-5

Complete the summary below.

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.


JOHN LOMAX’S PROJECT

Lomax began the research for this project by looking at 1..................... that were
not available in book form, as well as at certain books. While he was doing this
research, he met someone who ran a department at the 2..................... in Washington.
As a result of this contact, he was provided with the very latest kind or 3..................... for
his project.

Lomax believed that the places he should concentrate on were 4..................... in
the South of the US. While he and his son were on their trip, they added 5.....................
as places where they could find what they were looking for.


Tips: Summary (notes/table/flow chart) completion


Task guide

This task requires you to find pieces of information in the reading passage in order to
fill in the gaps in a summary (or notes or table or flow chart).

This task often, but not always, focusses on one part or section of the reading
passage, rather than on pieces of information spread throughout the text.

This task requires you to use exact words and phrases from the text; the answers
therefore all appear in the relevant part of the text. Do not try to use different words that
have the same meaning -your answer will be marked wrong even if the meaning is
correct.

In completion tasks, the questions follow the same order as the relevant
information in the reading passage.

Read the instructions carefully. Notice how many words you can use to answer each
question. The number of words may vary; you may be asked to write one. two or three
words in each question. The instructions will also tell you if you need to use a number
for your answer.

In this case, you are asked to complete a summary.


Step-by-step Guide
Step 1 - Locate the task in the text

First of all, you need to locate the task in the reading passage. Look for clues.

If the task has a title, it may refer to something that only appears in a particular section
of the text.

In this case, the title ('JOHN LOMAX'S PROJECT') doesn’t really help, because most of
the text is about Lomax's project. You will need to look for clues in the summary.

-The summary begins: 'Lomax began his research for this project...'. In which section
of the text (A-G) does he begin his research? Which sentence in that section refers
to him beginning his work?

-The second sentence of the summary refers to Washington. Is Washington
mentioned in the same section of the text?
-The second paragraph of the summary mentions ‘the South of the US’. Which
section (A-G) of the text mentions 'the South'?

-The second paragraph of the summary also mentions Lomax's son. Is his son
mentioned in the same section of the text?

Step 2 - Find the answers

Now look for the answers in the parts of the text you identified in step 1.
Remember that you must fill in the gaps with the exact words and phrases that appear
in the text. However, the rest of the summary does not consist of words and phrases
that are all repeated exactly from the text. Instead, the summary uses words
and phrases that have the same meaning as those used in the text or that express the
same ideas in a different way.

Question 1

Look at the words before and after the gap.

1 The verb after the gap is 'were'. What kind of word or phrase is required in the
gap?

-singular noun
-adjective
-or plural noun?

2 Which word in the text means 'look at' or 'study'?

3 Which word in the text means 'not available in book form'?

Now use your answers for step 2 to find the answer to Question 1.

Question 2
Look at the sentence containing Question 2.

1 What is the word or phrase in the gap likely to refer to?
-the name of a department
-the name of an institution
-or the name of a person?

2 Which word in the text means 'department'?

3 If someone 'runs' a place, they are the manager of it or in charge of it. Which
word in the text means 'manager' or 'head'?

Now use your answers for step 2 to find the answer to Question 2.

Questions 3-5

Now answer Questions 3-5 using the same process:

• Try to predict what kind of word is required in each gap by looking at the
surrounding context.

• Look for words and phrases in the text that mean the same or express the same
ideas as those used in the text surrounding the gaps in the summary.


Questions 6-10

Reading Passage 1 has seven sections labelled A-G.

Which section contains the following information?

Write the correct letter A-G in boxes 6-10 on your answer sheet.

NB: You may use any letter more than once.

6..................... a reference to the speed with which Lomax responded to a demand

7..................... a reason why Lomax doubted the effectiveness of a certain approach

8..................... reasons why Lomax was considered suitable for a particular official
post

9..................... a reference to a change of plan on Lomax’s part
10..................... a reference to one of Lomax’s theories being confirmed


Tips: Matching information to sections of text


Task guide

This task requires you to find the sections in which specific pieces of
information appear in the reading passage.
It is possible that the same section will be the answer to more than one question. If
this is the case, the instructions will tell you that you can use any letter more than once.
However, it is also possible that a section or sections of the text will not be the answer to
any of the questions. The instructions will not tell you if this is the case, but do not worry
if you have not chosen a particular section as the answer to any of the questions,
because this may be correct.

Be careful not to choose a section as your answer simply because it
contains something on the same general subject as the question. It is likely that
more than one section will contain information connected with the question, but
only one section will contain the precise piece of information asked for in the question.

Beware of 'word spotting'. Do not choose a section as your answer simply because
it contains a word that also appears in the question. Other sections may also contain
that word. It is very unlikely that the correct answer will involve simply finding the same
word in both the question and a certain section of the reading passage.


Step-by-step guide

The best approach to this task is to:

• read the first question and then look through the text to find the answer to it.

• move to the next question and repeat the process.

Question 6

Step 1 - Decide what you are looking for

1 The question refers to a 'demand' that Lomax responded to. Therefore, you are
looking for:

-A something he was required to do
-B something he asked for
-C something he was given

2 Question 6 refers to 'speed'. Therefore, you are looking for a reference to him doing
something:

-A well or badly
-B quickly or slowly

-C easily or with difficulty

Step 2 - Find the answer
Now use your answers for step 1 to find the answer to Question 6.

When you are looking through the text, look for something that matches the ideas or
information contained in the question.
In many questions, you will not find words and phrases in the reading passage that
mean exactly the same as those used in the question. Instead, you will need to find
places in the passage which refer to the idea expressed in the question.

When you have located the section which contains the relevant piece of information, you
will be able to answer these questions:

1 What was Lomax required to do?

2 Which phrase in the text means 'very quickly' or 'immediately'?
Now write your answer for Question 6.

Question 7

Step 1 - Decide what you are looking for

1 The question refers to why Lomax 'doubted the effectiveness' of an approach.
Therefore, you are looking for a reference to him:

-A finding out how something worked
-B explaining how something worked

-C thinking that something didn't work very well
2 The question refers to an 'approach'. In this context, you are likely to be
looking for:

-A a route taken on a journey
-B a research method
-C a type of music

Step 2 - Find the answer

Now use your answers for step 1 to find the answer to Question 7.

Look for references in the reading passage that match the ideas and information
contained in the question. When you have located the section which contains the
relevant piece of information, you will be able to answer these questions:

1 Which approach did Lomax consider ineffective?

2 Which word in the text means 'disadvantages' and refers to this approach, in his
opinion?

Now write your answer for Question 7.

Questions 8-10
Now answer Questions 8-10 using the same process:

• Read each question carefully and make sure that you understand exactly what you
are looking for in the text.

• Find the section of the reading passage which matches exactly the ideas and
information contained in the question.


Questions 11-13

Choose THREE lecters A-F.

Write your answers in boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet.

Which THREE of the following difficulties for Lomax are mentioned by the writer of the text?

A finding a publisher for his research

B deciding exactly what kind of music to collect

C the scepticism of others concerning his methods

D the reluctance of people to participate in his project
E making sure that participants in his project were nor exploited

F factors resulting from his choice of locations for recording


Tips: Multiple-choice with multiple answers


Task guide

This task requires you to select a specified number of options which correctly answer
the question.
This task requires you to ask yourself two things for each option: (a) Is it true
according to the text? and (b) Does it correctly answer the question?
Be careful! An option may be true, but it may not answer the question. For example, if
you are asked to select 'problems', an option may refer to something that did happen in
the text but was not actually a problem.
In these tasks, the options follow the same order as the relevant information in the
text.
Sometimes there is one mark for each correct option you choose; sometimes there is
only one mark for the whole task, and you have to choose all the correct options in order
to get a mark. If only one question number is given, you will know that only one mark will
be given. In this task, there are three question numbers (Question 11,
12 and 13),which means that three marks will be given.

Step-by-step guide

The best approach to this task is to:
• take each option one by one

• find the relevant place in the text and

• decide whether the option is one of the answers to the question or not.

Option A

Step 1 - Locate the option in the text

Look at option A and then read through the text. Which section mentions a publisher?
Step 2 - Decide whether the option answers the question

Look through the section you identified in step 1. Answer the questions below and
decide whether option A is one of the answers or not.

1. What was the name of the publishing company Lomax visited?

2. What was the name of the man he went to see about publishing the book?

3. How long after they met did this man contact Lomax?

4. Did this man agree to publish Lomax's book?

Using your answers to these questions, decide whether option A refers to something
that Lomax found difficult.


Option B

Step 1 - Locate the option in the text
Look at option B and then read through the text.

Which section contains three specific references to the kind of music Lomax decided to
collect?

Step 2 - Decide whether the option answers the question

Look through the section you identified in step 1. Answer the questions below and
decide whether option B is one of the answers or not.

1. What kind of music did Lomax decide to collect?

2. What two reasons are given for Lomax deciding to collect this kind of music?

3. Is there a reference to any other kind of music he considered collecting?

4. Is there a reference to Lomax taking a long time to decide what kind of music to
collect?

Using your answers to these questions, decide whether option B refers to something
that Lomax found difficult.
Options C-F
Now look at options C-F and use the same process to decide whether each one is an
answer or not:
• Find the relevant part of the text.

• Read that part of the text carefully to find out whether each of the options was
something that caused Lomax a problem or not.

Solution:

1. song collections 8. D
2. Library of Congress 9. B

3. portable recording
10. E
machine
11. D/E/F (in any
4. rural areas
order)
5. prisons and 12. D/E/F (in any
penitentiaries order)
13. D/E/F (in any
6. D
order)
7. F
