TITLE: The Earth and Space Foundation
INDEX: 461
============================================================

The Earth and Space Foundation

The community that focuses its efforts on the exploration of space has largely been
different from the community focused on the study and protection of the Earth's
environment, despite the fact that both fields of interest involve what might be referred to as
"scientific exploration'. The reason for this dichotomous existence is chiefly historical. The
exploration of the Earth has been occurring over many centuries, and the institutions
created to do it are often very different from those founded in the second part of the 20th
century to explore space. This separation is also caused by the fact that space exploration
has attracted experts from mainly non-biological disciplines - primarily engineers and
physicists - but the study of Earth and its environment is a domain heavily populated by
biologists.

The separation between the two communities is often reflected in attitudes. In the
environmental community, it is not uncommon for space exploration to be regarded as a
waste of money, distracting governments from solving major environmental problems here
at home. In the space exploration community, it is not uncommon for environmentalists to
be regarded as introspective people who divert attention from the more expansive visions
of the exploration of space - the ‘new frontier’. These perceptions can also be negative in
consequence because the full potential of both communities can be realised better when
they work together to solve problems. For example, those involved in space exploration
can provide the satellites to monitor the Earth’s fragile environments, and environmentalists
can provide information on the survival of life in extreme environments.

In the sense that Earth and space exploration both stem from the same human drive to
understand our environment and our place within it, there is no reason for the split to exist.
A more accurate view of Earth and space exploration is to see them as a continuum of
exploration with many interconnected and mutually beneficial links. The Earth and Space
Foundation, a registered charity, was established for the purposes of fostering such links
through field research and by direct practical action.

Projects that have been supported by the Foundation include environmental projects using
technologies resulting from space exploration: satellite communications, GPS, remote
sensing, advanced materials and power sources. For example, in places where people are
faced with destruction of the forests on which their livelihood depends, rather than rejecting
economic progress and trying to save the forests on their intrinsic merit, another approach
is to enhance the value of the forests - although these schemes must be carefully assessed
to be successful. In the past, the Foundation provided a grant to a group of expeditions that
used remote sensing to plan eco-tourism routes in the forests of Guatemala, thus providing
capital to the local communities through the tourist trade. This novel approach is now
making the protection of the forests a sensible economic decision.

The Foundation funds expeditions making astronomical observations from remote, difficult-
to-access Earth locations, archaeological field projects studying the development of early
civilisations that made significant contributions to astronomy and space sciences, and field
expeditions studying the way in which views of the astronomical environment shaped the
nature of past civilisations. A part of Syria - ‘the Fertile Crescent’ - was the birthplace of
astronomy, accountancy, animal domestication and many other fundamental developments
of human civilisation. The Foundation helped fund a large archaeology project by the
Society for Syrian Archaeology at the University of California, Los Angeles, in collaboration
with the Syrian government that used GPS and satellite imagery to locate mounds, or ’tels’,
containing artefacts and remnants of early civilisations. These collections are being used to
build a better picture of the nature of the civilisations that gave birth to astronomy.

Field research also applies the Earth’s environmental and biological resources to the
human exploration and settlement of space. This may include the use of remote
environments on Earth, as well as physiological and psychological studies in harsh
environments. In one research project, the Foundation provided a grant to an international
caving expedition to study the psychology of explorers subjected to long-term isolation in
caves in Mexico. The psychometric tests on the cavers were used to enhance US
astronaut selection criteria by the NASA Johnson Space Center.

Space-like environments on Earth help us understand how to operate in the space
environment or help us characterise extraterrestrial environments for future scientific
research. In the Arctic, a 24-kilometrewide impact crater formed by an asteroid or comet 23
million years ago has become home tc a Mars- analogue programme. The Foundation
helped fund the NASA Haughton-Mars Project to use this crater to test communications
and exploration technologies in preparation for the human exploration of Mars. The crater,
which sits in high Arctic permafrost, provides an excellent replica of the physical processes
occurring on Mars, a permafrosted, impact-altered planet. Geologists and biologists can
work at the site to help understand how impact craters shape the geological characteristics
and possibly biological potential of Mars.

In addition to its fieldwork and scientific activities. the Foundation has award programmes.
These include a series of awards for the future human exploration of Mars, a location with a
diverse set of exploration challenges. The awards will honour a number of ‘firsts’ on Mars
that include landing on the surface, undertaking an overland expedition to the Martian
South Pole, undertaking an overland expedition to the Martian North Pole, climbing
Olympus Mons, the highest mountain in the solar system, and descending to the bottom of
Valles Marineris, the deepest canyon on Mars. The Foundation will offer awards for
expeditions further out in the solar system once these Mars awards have been claimed.
Together, they demonstrate that the programme really has no boundary in what it could
eventually support, and they provide longevity for the objectives of the Foundation.

Questions 1-5

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in the reading passage?

Write

YES if the statement agrees with the views of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the views of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
1..................... Activities related to environmental protection and space exploration have
a common theme.
2..................... It is unclear why space exploration evolved in a different way from
environmental studies on Earth.
3..................... Governments tend to allocate more money to environmental projects than
space exploration.
4..................... Unfortunately, the environmental and space exploration communities have
little to offer each other in terms of resources.

5..................... The Earth and Space Foundation was set up later than it was originally
intended.


Questions 6-9

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

6 What was the significance of the ’novel approach' adopted in the Guatemala project?
A It minimised the need to protect the forests.

B It reduced the impact of tourists on the forests.

C It showed that preserving the forests can be profitable.

D It gave the Foundation greater control over the forests.

7 GPS and satellite imagery were used in the Syrian project to

A help archaeologists find ancient items.

B explore land that is hard to reach.

C reduce the impact of archaeological activity.
D evaluate some early astronomical theories.

8 One of the purposes of the Foundation’s awards is to

A attract non-scientists to its work.

B establish priorities for Mars exploration.
C offer financial incentives for space exploration.

D establish the long-term continuity of its activities.

9 What is the writer’s purpose in the passage?

A to persuade people to support the Foundation

B to explain the nature of the Foundation’s work
C to show how views on the Foundation have changed

D to reject earlier criticisms of the Foundation’s work


Questions 10-14

Complete the summary using the words, A-l, below.

Field research: Applying the Earth's environment to the settlement of space Some studies
have looked at how humans function in 10..................... situations.

In one project, it was decided to review cave explorers in Mexico who tolerate
11..................... periods on their own.

It is also possible to prepare for space exploration by studying environments on Earth that
are 12..................... to those on Mars.

A huge crater in the Arctic is the 13..................... place to test the technologies needed to
explore Mars and gather other relevant 14..................... information.


A comparable D ideal G scientific
B extreme E unexpected H extended

C connected F beneficial I individual

Solution:

1. YES 8. D
2. NO 9. B

3. NOT GIVEN 10. B
4. NO 11. H

5. NOT GIVEN 12. A
6. C 13. D

7. A 14. G
