TITLE: The Game of Tennis
INDEX: 474
============================================================

The Game of Tennis

A

Real Tennis as it is called in Britain, Royal Tennis as it is called in Australia, Court Tennis
as it is called in the States, Jeu de Paume as it is called in France, or Tennis as it is
properly known, is the oldest of all the racket games, and unlike most of the others, such as
squash or lawn tennis, it is a product of evolution rather than pure invention.

B

The game started to form into something recognizable in the 11th century. It started as
hand ball, played by monks around the cloisters of monasteries of Italy and France, much
as schoolchildren do today in corners of their school playground. Gradually as monks
travelled to other monasteries, more enjoyable rules were adopted, the more bizarre rules
abandoned and people started to add features to their courtyards that improved the
pastime, and demolish or modify others that detracted from it. The monks enjoyed the
game so much that the Pope banned the playing of it, and by the 14th century the game
had spread from cloister to castle and became a game of the nobility. There are other
theories about the origins of the game. A tennis historian, Roger Morgan, has theorized
that the game owes its origins to playing in medieval streets which is a nice idea but as the
streets were also used as sewers, it couldn’t have been much fun.

c

The 16th and 17th centuries were the heyday of tennis. It was played by the nobility of
France and Britain and there were reputedly 1800 courts in Paris alone at this time though
a lot of these would have been quite ramshackle structures. In Britain the game flourished
with royalty being famous players. King Henry VII was enthusiastic though not skilled but
his son Henry VIII (more famous for his wives!) was an adept. Kings Charles I and II of
England were both keen players and the game actually indirectly led to the death of King
James I. One French king also died as the result of being hit by a tennis ball. Modern real
tennis is virtually indistinguishable from the game played in those days.

D

Originally the game was played with the bare hand, later with a glove, then someone had
the bright idea of attaching cord or tendons to the fingers. It was a short step from there to
attaching these cords to a frame and adding a handle to make a racket. The ball, although
similar in appearance to a lawn tennis ball is made with a core of cork, covered with cloth,
tightly bound in string and covered in felt. The balls are all hand stitched and last about 2
weeks. This method has been used throughout history, although other substances such as
hair or wool were used for the centre, and the balls were a good deal lighter.

E

The influence of real tennis can most clearly be seen in the Basque games known by the
catchall name of pelota. There are various forms of pelota with different types of court, ball
and racket, and there are forms which still uses the hand or even a basket type racket.
Similarities can be seen in the court layout and rules. Probably most racket sports owe
something to real tennis to some extent. Squash though derives from a game known as
rackets which was developed in the debtor prisons of 17th and 18th century Britain.

F

As we have seen above, tennis of one kind or another has been played in France as far
back as the 12th century. It was not until the late 19th century though that lawn tennis
became popular. Major Walter Wingfield, in search of a more vigorous game than croquet
for the leisure classes, devised an activity that was a hybrid of badminton and real tennis.
He called it Sphairistike, Greek for ball games. In 1877 the All England Club held a
tournament later to be known as Wimbledon. Eventually the game was modified from the
prescriptions laid out by Major Wingfield. For instance Wingfield’s rules called for the game
to be played on a court the shape of an hourglass. Soon it was played on a rectangular
court. There have also been changes in the quality and type of clothing and equipment
used. Early last century shorts were a radical idea. During the last few decades racket
materials have radically changed with graphite and other compounds being used. Wooden
rackets are now an anachronism, to the lament of the purists.

G

Nowadays there is a real tennis circuit as there is for lawn tennis. The top professionals are
as fit and skilled as their lawn tennis counterparts if not as famous and well paid. Every
court in the world has its own professional or professionals and these players travel round
the world playing the top competitions as well as looking after their home courts. In fact real
tennis is now probably played at a higher standard that at any other time in its history.

H

In the mid 19th century there was a renaissance in tennis and a flurry of court construction
and the first courts were built in the US and Australia. Unfortunately the coming of the First
World War cut short tennis’ re-emergence. Over the last 25 years tennis has again begun
to grow. The modern costs of building the courts inhibits the growth a bit but new courts
have been springing up in the US, France, Australia and the UK with talk of court
construction going on in Holland, Russia and South Africa. The future again looks bright for
real tennis.

Questions 28 - 34

The reading passage on The Game of Tennis has 8 paragraphs (A - H).

From the list of headings below choose the most suitable headings for paragraphs B - H

Write the appropriate number (i - xii) in boxes 28 - 34 on your answer sheet. NB There are
more headings than paragraphs, so you will not use them all.

i. The Golden Age of Tennis
ii. Modern Lawn Tennis
iii. Court Construction Techniques
iv. The Different Names of Tennis
v. The Real Tennis Revival
vi. Tournament Tennis
vii. Tennis During the War
viii. Early Development
ix. Other Descendants of Tennis
x. Tennis and the Pope
xi. Tennis Equipment
xii. Tennis and Prisons

28..................... Paragraph B

29..................... Paragraph C

30..................... Paragraph D
31..................... Paragraph E

32..................... Paragraph F

33..................... Paragraph G

34..................... Paragraph H


Questions 35 - 40

Below you will find a summary of The Game of Tennis. Complete the summary using words
from the box below the summary and write them in boxes 35 - 40 on your answer sheet.

NB There are more words than spaces, so you will not use them all.

Example Answer
An ancient game, tennis has had (eg)_____names in different countries. various


An ancient game, tennis has had (eg)_________ names in different countries. The game
started
in Italy and France and the rules 35..................... into the game played today. The most
36.....................
period of play was about four to five hundred years ago with hundreds of courts in use,
albeit some rather 37...................... Royalty were enthusiastic players including several
kings. Equipment is much the same today as hundreds of years ago and although some
materials have changed, balls and other equipment are still made by hand. Tennis has
38..................... the development of other games including Basque pelota and the more
recognisable lawn tennis. The “new” tennis has become much more well known and has
revolutionised equipment. Today the “old” form of tennis is enjoying a 39..................... with
a professional tournament circuit and competitions played around the world and new courts
are appearing despite high 40..................... costs.

playing popular fantastic constructionplayed
insurance developedvarious desirable hindered
resurgenceinterest dilapidatedinfluenced rested

Solution:

1. viii 8. developed
2. i 9. fantastic

3. vi 10. dilapidated
4. ix 11. influenced

5. vi 12. resurgence
6. v 13. construction

7. vii
