TITLE: The Impact of the Potato
INDEX: 495
============================================================

The Impact of the Potato

Jeff Chapman relates the story of history the most important vegetable

A The potato was first cultivated in South America between three and seven thousand
years ago, though scientists believe they may have grown wild in the region as long as
13,000 years ago. The genetic patterns of potato distribution indicate that the potato
probably originated in the mountainous west-central region of the continent.

B Early Spanish chroniclers who misused the Indian word batata (sweet potato) as the
name for the potato noted the importance of the tuber to the Incan Empire. The Incas had
learned to preserve the potato for storage by dehydrating and mashing potatoes into a
substance called Chuchu could be stored in a room for up to 10 years, providing excellent
insurance against possible crop failures. As well as using the food as a staple crop, the

Incas thought potatoes made childbirth easier and used it to treat injuries.
C The Spanish conquistadors first encountered the potato when they arrived in Peru in

1532 in search of gold, and noted Inca miners eating chuchu. At the time the Spaniards
failed to realize that the potato represented a far more important treasure than either silver
or gold, but they did gradually begin to use potatoes as basic rations aboard their ships.
After the arrival of the potato in Spain in 1570a few Spanish farmers began to cultivate
them on a small scale, mostly as food for livestock.

D Throughout Europe, potatoes were regarded with suspicion, distaste and fear. Generally
considered to be unfit for human consumption, they were used only as animal fodder and
sustenance for the starving. In northern Europe, potatoes were primarily grown in botanical
gardens as an exotic novelty. Even peasants refused to eat from a plant that produced
ugly, misshapen tubers and that had come from a heathen civilization. Some felt that the
potato plant’s resemblance to plants in the nightshade family hinted that it was the creation
of witches or devils.

E In meat-loving England, farmers and urban workers regarded potatoes with extreme
distaste. In 1662, the Royal Society recommended the cultivation of the tuber to the English
government and the nation, but this recommendation had little impact. Potatoes did not
become a staple until, during the food shortages associated with the Revolutionary Wars,
the English government began to officially encourage potato cultivation. In 1795, the Board
of Agriculture issued a pamphlet entitled “Hints Respecting the Culture and Use of
Potatoes” this was followed shortly by pro-potato editorials and potato recipes in The
Times. Gradually, the lower classes began to follow the lead of the upper classes.

F A similar pattern emerged across the English Channel in the Netherlands, Belgium and
France. While the potato slowly gained ground in eastern France (where it was often the
only crop remaining after marauding soldiers plundered wheat fields and vineyards), it did
not achieve widespread acceptance until the late 1700s. The peasants remained
suspicious, in spite of a 1771 paper from the Facult de Paris testifying that the potato was
not harmful but beneficial. The people began to overcome their distaste when the plant
received the royal seal of approval: Louis XVI began to sport a potato flower in his
buttonhole, and Marie-Antoinette wore the purple potato blossom in her hair.

G Frederick the Great of Prussia saw the potato’s potential to help feed his nation and
lower the price of bread, but faced the challenge of overcoming the people’s prejudice
against the plant. When he issued a 1774 order for his subjects to grow potatoes as
protection against famine, the town of Kolberg replied: “The things have neither smell nor
taste, not even the dogs will eat them, so what use are they to us?” Trying a less direct
approach to encourage his subjects to begin planting potatoes, Frederick used a bit of
reverse psychology: he planted a royal field of potato plants and stationed a heavy guard to
protect this field from thieves. Nearby peasants naturally assumed that anything worth
guarding was worth stealing, and so snuck into the field and snatched the plants for their
home gardens. Of course, this was entirely in line with Frederick’s wishes.

H Historians debate whether the potato was primarily a cause or an effect of the huge
population boom in industrial-era England and Wales. Prior to 1800the English diet had
consisted primarily of meat, supplemented by bread, butter and cheese. Few vegetables
were consumed, most vegetables being regarded as nutritionally worthless and potentially
harmful. This view began to change gradually in the late 1700s. The Industrial Revolution
was drawing an ever increasing percentage of the populace into crowded cities, where only
the richest could afford homes with ovens or coal storage rooms, and people were working

12-16 hour days which left them with little time or energy to prepare food. High yielding,
easily prepared potato crops were the obvious solution to England’s food problems.
I Whereas most of their neighbors regarded the potato with suspicion and had to be
persuaded to use it by the upper classes, the Irish peasantry embraced the tuber more
passionately than anyone since the Incas. The potato was well suited to the Irish the soil
and climate, and its high yield suited the most important concern of most Irish farmers: to
feed their families.

J The most dramatic example of the potato’s potential to alter population patterns occurred
in Ireland, where the potato had become a staple by 1800. The Irish population doubled to
eight million between 1780 and 1841this without any significant expansion of industry or
reform of agricultural techniques beyond the widespread cultivation of the potato. Though
Irish landholding practices were primitive in comparison with those of England, the potato’s
high yields allowed even the poorest farmers to produce more healthy food than they
needed with scarcely any investment or hard labor. Even children could easily plant,
harvest and cook potatoes, which of course required no threshing, curing or grinding. The
abundance provided by potatoes greatly decreased infant mortality and encouraged early
marriage.

Questions 1-5

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage 1?

In boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
1..................... The early Spanish called potato as the Incan name ‘Chuchu’

2..................... The purposes of Spanish coming to Peru were to find out potatoes

3..................... The Spanish believed that the potato has the same nutrients as other
vegetables

4..................... Peasants at that time did not like to eat potatoes because they were
ugly

5..................... The popularity of potatoes in the UK was due to food shortages during
the war


Questions 6-13

Complete the sentences below with NO MORE THAN ONE WORD from the passage for
each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 6-13 on your answer sheet.

6. In France, people started to overcome their disgusting about potatoes because the King
put a potato 6..................... in his button hole.

7. Frederick realized the potential of potato but he had to handle the 7..................... against
potatoes from ordinary people.
8. The King of Prussia adopted some 8..................... psychology to make people accept
potatoes.
9. Before 1800the English people preferred eating 9..................... with bread, butter and
cheese.
10. The obvious way to deal with England food problems were high yielding potato
10.....................
11. The Irish 11..................... and climate suited potatoes well.

12. Between 1780 and 1841, based on the 12..................... of the potatoes, the Irish
population doubled to eight million.
13. The potato’s high yields help the poorest farmers to produce more healthy food almost
without 13.....................

Solution:

1. FALSE 8. reverse
2. FALSE 9. meat

3. NOT GIVEN 10. crops
4. TRUE 11. soil

5. TRUE 12. cultivation
6. flower 13. investment

7. prejudice
