TITLE: The Invention of Television
INDEX: 499
============================================================

The Invention of Television

The question “Who invented television?” is simple enough, but the answer is surprisingly
controversial. No one person was responsible for producing what we think of as television
today and the credit is due to various inventors.

The Scotsman, John Logie Baird, is considered by many to be the inventor of television. He
showed early signs of his inventing ingenuity by setting up a telephone exchange to
connect his house to those of his friends near by. His first interest in television came in
1903, after he read a German book on the photoelectric properties of selenium. In 1873,
this element was discovered to have the capacity to generate a current based on the
amount of light applied to it. Working initially in Hastings, England, Baird famously created
an apparatus using an old hatbox he bought in a used goods store, a pair of scissors, some
needles, some bicycle light lenses and an old tea chest. Baird also used a Nipkow disk,
created by German inventor, Paul Nipkow, and a lot of his work was based on the previous
work by German, Arthur Korn. In February 1924, Baird demonstrated moving silhouette
images on a ‘television’. Later that year, after nearly destroying the house and nearly killing
himself with an electric shock, Baird moved to London, where he gave the first public
display of his invention. On 2 October 1925, Baird used an office assistant, William
Taynton, to move for his transmitted pictures, and Taynton became the first person to be
televised moving and in full tonal range. Baird is also later credited with demonstrating the
first images on colour television, on 3rd July 1928, although the credit for being the inventor
of colour television is again disputed. Another first for Baird was transmitting the first
television pictures across the Atlantic in 1928. Although Baird was well known for his
invention, he also became famous for refusing an offer of £100,000 for the shares in his
company, which was an enormous sum at that time. Baird famously said that he would not
be able to sleep at night, knowing he had that much money.

Philo Farnsworth successfully demonstrated electronic television in San Francisco, in 1927,
using a different system. Farnsworth realised that a picture could be dissected by a simple
television camera into a series of lines of electricity. The lines would be transmitted so
quickly that the eyes would merge the lines. Then, an image dissector, which Farnsworth
created, would change those lines back into a picture. The Russian inventor, Vladimir

Zworykin, built on this work and it was Zworykin’s designs that were eventually used by the
BBC in the UK to replace Baird’s system.

Baird’s initial work would not have been successful without the previous work of Paul
Nipkow. Nipkow came up with the idea of ‘scanning’ a television image by using a spinning
disk with a spiral of small pinholes. When spun at a high rate of speed, each hole would
allow light to fall on a selenium cell on the other side of the disk. The amount of voltage the
cell generated would depend on the amount of light reflected from the object being
photographed. One rotation of the disk equalled one frame of “video”. At the place where
the signal was received, the process would be reversed. A similar disk spun in sync and a
neon lamp reacted to the changes in voltage with the speed required to keep up with the
spinning disk and projected the images onto a screen. Although Nipkow created the disk
and acquired a patent for his invention, he did not create the apparatus to project images.
The patent expired after 15 years, as no one was interested then in the work. Baird’s first
practical television systems used an electro-mechanical picture scanning method, the
method that Nipkow had helped create with his disk. Nipkow became a celebrated scientist
in Germany for his work, but the mechanical nature of the Nipkow Disk caused the
invention to fade to obscurity with the use of the cathode ray tube.


Arthur Korn was another German scientist working in the same field as Baird and Nipkow
and it was his work that allowed the development of Nipkow’s work that in turn led to

Baird’s breakthroughs. Korn’s early work was focused on the transmission of visual
telegraphic transmission, using his developments in amplification tube technology. He sent
a picture of the German Crown Prince 1800 kilometres in 1906 and sent a picture of the
Pope across the Atlantic in 1923. Korn’s work was celebrated and, from 1928, the German
police used his technology to send photographs and fingerprints.

Finally, another American, Charles Francis Jenkins, has a claim to be the inventor of
television. Jenkins, who at the time was very well known for inventing the motion picture
projector, first transmitted a silhouette picture from one room to another in 1922. Jenkins
founded a broadcasting company in 1928, but the crash of 1929 forced him out of
business. Most people agree that Baird gave his first public demonstration of television a
couple years earlier than Jenkins, but this is disputed in some places.


It is plain to see why any claim to be the inventor of television is said to be controversial. In
many cases, the answer to the question, “Who invented television?”, often just depends on
from which country the person answering the question is.

Questions 1-7

Look at the different significant people in the process of the invention of the television

(questions 1 – 7) and match them to their roles in this process (A – G).

Write your answers in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet.
The Significant Person Roles
A His work was adopted by the BBC for their
1 John Logie Baird
broadcasting business.
2 William Taynton B His work was used to help fight crime.
3 Philo Farnsworth C He was the first person to move on television.
4 Vladimir Zworykin D He used second hand parts in his invention.
E His business was destroyed by a
5 Paul Nipkow
financial crisis
6 Arthur Korn F He invented the image dissector.
7 Charles Francis Jenkins G His work was initially of no interest to anyone.
1.....................

2.....................

3.....................

4.....................
5.....................

6.....................

7.....................


Questions 8 -10

Label the diagram below.

Write NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from the text for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 8-10 on your answer sheet.
8.....................
9.....................

10.....................

Questions 11-13

Do the following statements agree with the information given in the text?

In boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet write:

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this

11..................... Nipkow died without any of his work being widely recognized.

12..................... Korn and Nipkow often met to discuss their work.
13..................... Charles Francis Jenkins was already famous when he experimented with
television.

Solution:

1. D 8. (small) pinholes
2. C 9. (A) selenium cell

3. F 10. (a) neon lamp
4. A 11. FALSE

5. G 12. NOT GIVEN
6. B 13. TRUE

7. E
