TITLE: The Lake Erie Canal
INDEX: 502
============================================================

The Lake Erie Canal

Begun in 1817 and opened in its entirety in 1825, the Erie Canal is considered by some to
be the engineering marvel of the nineteenth century. When the federal government
concluded that the project was too ambitious to undertake, the State of New York took on
the task of carving 363 miles of canal through the wilderness, with nothing but the muscle
power of men and horses.

Once derided as ‘Clinton’s Folly’ for the Governor who lent his vision and political muscle to
the project, the Erie Canal experienced unparalleled success almost overnight. The iconic
waterway established settlement patterns for most of the United States during the
nineteenth century, made New York the financial capital of the world, provided a critical
supply line that helped the North win the Civil War, and precipitated a series of social and
economic changes throughout a young America.

Explorers had long searched for a water route to the west. Throughout the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, the lack of an efficient and safe transportation network kept
populations and trade largely confined to coastal areas. At the beginning of the nineteenth
century, the Allegheny Mountains were the Western Frontier. The Northwest Territories that
would later become Illinois, Indiana, Michigan and Ohio were rich in timber, minerals, and
fertile land for farming, but it took weeks to reach these things. Travellers were faced with
rutted turnpike roads that baked to hardness in the summer sun. In the winter, the roads
dissolved into mud.

An imprisoned flour merchant named Jesse Hawley envisioned a better way: a canal from
Buffalo on the eastern shore of Lake Erie to Albany on the upper Hudson River, a distance
of almost 400 miles. Long a proponent of efficient water transportation, Hawley had gone
bankrupt trying to move his products to market. Hawley’s ideas caught the interest of
Assemblyman Joshua Forman, who submitted the first state legislation related to the Erie
Canal in 1808, calling for a series of surveys to be made examining the practicality of a
water route between Lake Erie and the Hudson River. In 1810, Thomas Eddy, and State
Senator Jonas Platt, hoping to get plans for the canal moving forward, approached
influential Senator De Witt Clinton, former mayor of New York City, to enlist his support.
Though Clinton had been recruited to the canal effort by Eddy and Platt, he quickly became
one of the canal’s most active supporters and went on to successfully tie his very political
fate to its success.

On April 15th, 1817, the New York State Legislature finally approved construction of the
Erie Canal. The Legislature authorised $7 million for construction of the 363-mile long
waterway, which was to be 40 feet wide and eighteen feet deep. Construction began on
July 4th 1817 and took eight years.

Like most canals, the Erie Canal depended on a lock system in order to compensate for
changes in water levels over distance. A lock is a section of canal or river that is closed off
to control the water level, so that boats can be raised or lowered as they pass through it.
Locks have two sets of sluice gates (top and bottom), which seal off and then open the
entrances to the chamber, which is where a boat waits while the movement up or down
takes place. In addition, locks also have valves at the bottom of the sluice gates and it is by
opening these valves that water is allowed into and out of the chamber to raise or lower the
water level, and hence the boat.
The effect of the Erie Canal was both immediate and dramatic, and settlers poured west.

The explosion of trade prophesied by Governor Clinton began, spurred by freight rates
from Buffalo to New York of $10 per ton by canal, compared with $100 per ton by road. In
1829, there were 3,640 bushels of wheat transported down the canal from Buffalo. By
1837, this figure had increased to 500,000 bushels and, four years later, it reached one
million. In nine years, canal tolls more than recouped the entire cost of construction. Within
15 years of the canal’s opening, New York was the busiest port in America, moving
tonnages greater than Boston, Baltimore and New Orleans combined. Today, it can still be
seen that every major city in New York State falls along the trade route established by the
Erie Canal and nearly 80 per cent of upstate New York’s inhabitants live within 25 miles of
the Erie Canal.

The completion of the Erie Canal spurred the first great westward movement of American
settlers, gave access to the resources west of the Appalachians and made New York the
preeminent commercial city in the United States. At one time, more than 50,000 people
depended on the Erie Canal for their livelihood. From its inception, the Erie Canal helped
form a whole new culture revolving around canal life. For those who travelled along the
canal in packet boats or passenger vessels, the canal was an exciting place. Gambling and
entertainment were frequent pastimes, and often families would meet each year at the
same locations to share stories and adventures. Today, the canal has returned to its former
glory and is filled with pleasure boats, fishermen, holidaymakers and cyclists riding the
former towpaths where mules once trod. The excitement of the past is alive and well.

Questions 1-6

Write the correct letter, A-K, in any order in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.

Choose SIX letters, A-K.

What SIX of the following were effects of the Lake Erie Canal?


A It brought building materials to expand the city of Chicago.

B It established the financial dominance of New York City.

C It generated taxes that stimulated the whole region.
D It helped the north win the US Civil War.

E It was used for training troops in World War One.

F It helped boost a politician’s career.

G It stimulated the shipbuilding industry.

H It led to cheaper distribution for goods.

I It influenced New York State’s population distribution.

J It allowed damaging species of fish to travel to different ecosystems.

K It became a boost for tourism.


Questions 7-9

Label the diagram below.

Write NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the text for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 7-9 on your answer sheet.
7.....................

8.....................
9.....................


Questions 10-13

Answer the questions below.

Write NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER from the text for each
answer.

Write your answers in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet.
10. What was the beneficial factor for productive agriculture in the Northwest Territories at
the beginning of the nineteenth century? 10.....................
11. In what commodity did the person who first came up with the idea of the Erie Canal
trade? 11.....................

12. How long did it take to build the Erie Canal? 12.....................

13. How were the Erie Canal’s building costs recovered? 13.....................

Solution:

1. B,D,F,H,I,K IN ANY
8. (the) chamber
ORDER
2. B,D,F,H,I,K IN ANY
9. Valves
ORDER
3. B,D,F,H,I,K IN ANY
10. Fertile land
ORDER
4. B,D,F,H,I,K IN ANY
11. Flour
ORDER
5. B,D,F,H,I,K IN ANY
12. 8 years
ORDER
6. B,D,F,H,I,K IN ANY
13. (Canal) tolls
ORDER
7. (Sluice) gates
