TITLE: The meaning and power of smell
INDEX: 507
============================================================

The meaning and power of smell

The sense of smell, or olfaction, is powerful. Odours affect us on a physical, psychological
and social level. For the most part, however, we breathe in the aromas which surround us
without being consciously aware of their importance to us. It is only when the faculty of
smell is impaired for some reason that we begin to realise the essential role the sense of
smell plays in our sense of well-being

A

A survey conducted by Anthony Synott at Montreal’s Concordia University asked
participants to comment on how important smell was to them in their lives. It became
apparent that smell can evoke strong emotional responses. A scent associated with a good
experience can bring a rush of joy, while a foul odour or one associated with a bad memory
may make us grimace with disgust. Respondents to the survey noted that many of their
olfactory likes and dislikes were based on emotional associations. Such associations can
be powerful enough so that odours that we would generally label unpleasant become
agreeable, and those that we would generally consider fragrant become disagreeable for
particular individuals. The perception of smell, therefore, consists not only of the sensation
of the odours themselves, but of the experiences and emotions associated with them.

B

Odours are also essential cues in social bonding. One respondent to the survey believed
that there is no true emotional bonding without touching and smelling a loved one. In fact,
infants recognise the odours of their mothers soon after birth and adults can often identify
their children or spouses by scent. In one well-known test, women and men were able to
distinguish by smell alone clothing worn by their marriage partners from similar clothing
worn by other people. Most of the subjects would probably never have given much thought
to odour as a cue for identifying family members before being involved in the test, but as
the experiment revealed, even when not consciously considered, smells register.
C

In spite of its importance to our emotional and sensory lives, smell is probably the most
undervalued sense in many cultures. The reason often given for the low regard in which
smell is held is that, in comparison with its importance among animals, the human sense of
smell is feeble and undeveloped. While it is true that the olfactory powers of humans are
nothing like as fine as those possessed by certain animals, they are still remarkably acute.
Our noses are able to recognise thousands of smells, and to perceive odours which are
present only in extremely small quantities.

D

Smell, however, is a highly elusive phenomenon. Odours, unlike colours, for instance,
cannot be named in many languages because the specific vocabulary simply doesn’t exist.
‘It smells like . . . ,’ we have to say when describing an odour, struggling to express our
olfactory experience. Nor can odours be recorded: there is no effective way to either
capture or store them over time. In the realm of olfaction, we must make do with
descriptions and recollections. This has implications for olfactory research.
E

Most of the research on smell undertaken to date has been of a physical scientific nature.
Significant advances have been made in the understanding of the biological and chemical
nature of olfaction, but many fundamental questions have yet to be answered. Researchers
have still to decide whether smell is one sense or two - one responding to odours proper
and the other registering odourless chemicals in the air. Other unanswered questions are
whether the nose is the only part of the body affected by odours, and how smells can be
measured objectively given the nonphysical components. Questions like these mean that
interest in the psychology of smell is inevitably set to play an increasingly important role for
researchers.

F

However, smell is not simply a biological and psychological phenomenon. Smell is cultural,
hence it is a social and historical phenomenon. Odours are invested with cultural values:
smells that are considered to be offensive in some cultures may be perfectly acceptable in
others. Therefore, our sense of smell is a means of, and model for, interacting with the
world. Different smells can provide us with intimate and emotionally charged experiences
and the value that we attach to these experiences is interiorised by the members of society
in a deeply personal way. Importantly, our commonly held feelings about smells can help
distinguish us from other cultures. The study of the cultural history of smell is, therefore, in
a very real sense, an investigation into the essence of human culture.

Questions 1-6

Reading Passage 3 has six paragraphs, A-F.

Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-viii, in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.


List of Headings
i The difficulties of talking about smells
ii The role of smell in personal relationships
iii Future studies into smell
iv The relationship between the brain and the nose
v The interpretation of smells as a factor in defining groups
vi Why our sense of smell is not appreciated
vii Smell is our superior sense
viii The relationship between smell and feelings


1 Paragraph A 1.....................

2 Paragraph B 2.....................

3 Paragraph C 3.....................

4 Paragraph D 4.....................

5 Paragraph E 5.....................

6 Paragraph F 6.....................


Questions 7-10

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 7-10 on your answer sheet.

7 According to the introduction, we become aware of the importance of smell when
A we discover a new smell.

B we experience a powerful smell.

C our ability to smell is damaged.

D we are surrounded by odours.
8 The experiment described in paragraph B

A shows how we make use of smell without realising it.

B demonstrates that family members have a similar smell.

C proves that a sense of smell is learnt.
D compares the sense of smell in males and females.


9 What is the writer doing in paragraph C?

A supporting other research

B making a proposal

C rejecting a common belief

D describing limitations


10 What does the writer suggest about the study of smell in the atmosphere in paragraph

E?
A The measurement of smell is becoming more accurate.

B Researchers believe smell is a purely physical reaction.

C Most smells are inoffensive.

D Smell is yet to be defined.


Questions 11-14

Complete the sentences below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 11-14 on your answer sheet.

11 Tests have shown that odours can help people recognise the 11.....................
belonging to their husbands and wives.

12 Certain linguistic groups may have difficulty describing smell because they lack
the appropriate 12.....................

13 The sense of smell may involve response to 13..................... which do not smell,
in addition to obvious odours.

14 Odours regarded as unpleasant in certain 14..................... are not regarded
as unpleasant in others.
5

Solution:

1. viii 8. A
2. ii 9. C

3. vi 10. D
4. i 11. clothing

5. iii 12. vocabulary
6. v 13. chemicals

7. C 14. cultures
