TITLE: The MIT factor: celebrating 150 years of maverick
INDEX: 510
============================================================

The MIT factor: celebrating 150 years of maverick
genius

The Massachusetts Institute of Technology has led the world into the future for 150 years
with scientific innovations.

The musician Yo-Yo Ma’s cello may not be the obvious starting point for a journey into one
of the world’s great universities. But, as you quickly realise when you step inside the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, there’s precious little going on that you would
normally see on a university campus. The cello, resting in a corner of MIT’s celebrated
media laboratory — a hub of creativity — looks like any other electric classical instrument.
But it is much more. Machover, the composer, teacher and inventor responsible for its
creation, calls it a ‘hyperinstrument’, a sort of thinking machine that allows Ma and his cello
to interact with one another and make music together. ‘The aim is to build an instrument
worthy of a great musician like Yo-Yo Ma that can understand what he is trying to do and
respond to it,’ Machover says. The cello has numerous sensors across its body and by
measuring the pressure, speed and angle of the virtuoso’s performance it can interpret his
mood and engage with it, producing extraordinary new sounds. The virtuoso cellist
frequently performs on the instrument as he tours around the world.

Machover’s passion for pushing at the boundaries of the existing world to extend and
unleash human potential is not a bad description of MIT as a whole. This unusual
community brings highly gifted, highly motivated individuals together from a vast range of
disciplines, united by a common desire: to leap into the dark and reach for the unknown.

The result of that single unifying ambition is visible all around. For the past 150 years, MIT
has been leading the world into the future. The discoveries of its teachers and students
have become the common everyday objects that we now all take for granted. The
telephone, electromagnets, radars, high-speed photography, office photocopiers, cancer
treatments, pocket calculators, computers, the Internet, the decoding of the human
genome, lasers, space travel ... the list of innovations that involved essential contributions
from MIT and its faculty goes on and on.
From the moment MIT was founded by William Barton Rogers in 1861, it was clear what it
was not. While Harvard stuck to the English model of a classical education, with its
emphasis on Latin and Greek, MIT looked to the German system of learning based on
research and hands-on experimentation. Knowledge was at a premium, but it had to be
useful.

This down-to-earth quality is enshrined in the school motto, Mens et manus - Mind and
hand - as well as its logo, which shows a gowned scholar standing beside an ironmonger
bearing a hammer and anvil. That symbiosis of intellect and craftsmanship still suffuses the
institute’s classrooms, where students are not so much taught as engaged and inspired.

Take Christopher Merrill, 21, a third-year undergraduate in computer science. He is
spending most of his time on a competition set in his robotics class. The contest is to see
which student can most effectively program a robot to build a house out of blocks in under
ten minutes. Merrill says he could have gone for the easiest route - designing a simple
robot that would build the house quickly. But he wanted to try to master an area of robotics
that remains unconquered — adaptability, the ability of the robot to rethink its plans as the
environment around it changes, as would a human.
‘I like to take on things that have never been done before rather than to work in an iterative
way just making small steps forward,’ he explains.
Merrill is already planning the start-up he wants to set up when he graduates in a year’s
time. He has an idea for an original version of a contact lens that would augment reality by
allowing consumers to see additional visual information. He is fearful that he might be just
too late in taking his concept to market, as he has heard that a Silicon Valley firm is already
developing something similar. As such, he might become one of many MIT graduates who
go on to form companies that fail. Alternatively, he might become one of those who go on
to succeed in spectacular fashion. And there are many of them. A survey of living MIT
alumni* found that they have formed 25,800 companies, employing more than three million
people, including about a quarter of the workforce of Silicon Valley. What MIT delights in is
taking brilliant minds from around the world in vastly diverse disciplines and putting them
together. You can see that in its sparkling new David Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer

Research, which brings scientists, engineers and clinicians under one roof.
Or in its Energy Initiative, which acts as a bridge for MIT’s combined work across all its five
schools, channelling huge resources into the search for a solution to global warming. It
works to improve the efficiency of existing energy sources, including nuclear power. It is
also forging ahead with alternative energies from solar to wind and geothermal, and has
recently developed the use of viruses to synthesise batteries that could prove crucial in the
advancement of electric cars.

In the words of Tim Berners-Lee, the Briton who invented the World Wide Web, ‘It’s not just
another university.

Even though I spend my time with my head buried in the details of web technology, the
nice thing is that when I do walk the corridors, I bump into people who are working in other
fields with their students that are fascinating, and that keeps me intellectually alive.’
adapted from the Guardian

* people who have left a university or college after completing their studies there

Questions 1-5

Do the following statements agree with the information in the reading passage?

Write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
1..................... The activities going on at the MIT campus are like those at any other
university.
2..................... Harvard and MIT shared a similar approach to education when they were
founded.
3..................... The school motto was suggested by a former MIT student.

4..................... MIT’s logo reflects the belief that intellect and craftsmanship go together.

5..................... Silicon Valley companies pay higher salaries to graduates from MIT.


Questions 6-9

Complete the notes below.

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.

Christopher Merrill - student at MIT


Degree subject: 6.....................

Competition: to 7..................... the automated construction of a house
Special focus on: the 8..................... of robots

Future plans: to develop new type of 9.....................


Questions 10-13

Answer the questions below.

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.

10 What proportion of workers at Silicon Valley are employed in companies set up by MIT
graduates? 10.....................

11 What problem does MIT’s Energy Initiative aim to solve? 11.....................

12 Which ‘green’ innovation might MIT’s work with viruses help improve? 12.....................

13 In which part of the university does Tim Berners-Lee enjoy stimulating conversations
with other MIT staff? 13.....................

Solution:

1. FALSE 8. adaptability
2. FALSE 9. contact lens

3. NOT GIVEN 10. one quarter
4. TRUE 11. global warming

5. NOT GIVEN 12. electric cars
6. computer
13. corridors
science
7. program
