TITLE: The origin of ancient writing
INDEX: 521
============================================================

The origin of ancient writing

A. The Sumerians, an ancient people of the Middle East, had a story explaining the
invention of writing more than 5,000 years ago. It seems a messenger of the King of

Uruk arrived at the court of a distant ruler so exhausted that he was unable to deliver
the oracle message. So the king set down the words of his next messages on a clay
tablet. A charming story, whose retelling at a recent symposium at the University of
Pennsylvania amused scholar. They smiled at the absurdity of a letter which the
recipient would not have been able to read.

B. They also doubted that the earliest writing was a direct rendering of speech. Writing
more likely began as a separate, symbolic system of communication and only later
merged with spoken language.
C. Yet in the story the Sumerians, who lived in Mesopotamia, in what is now southern

Iraq, seemed to understand writing's transforming function. As Dr. Holly Pittman,
director of the University's Center for Ancient Studies, observed, writing 'arose out of
the need to store and transmit information ...over time and space'.
D. In exchanging interpretations and information, the scholars acknowledged that they
still had no fully satisfying answers to the questions of how and why writing
developed. Many favored an explanation of writing's origins in the visual arts, pictures
becoming increasingly abstract and eventually representing spoken words. Their
views clashed with a widely held theory among archaeologists that writing developed
from the pieces of clay that Sumerian accountants used as tokens to keep track of
goods.
E. Archaeologists generally concede that they have no definitive answer to the question
of whether writing was invented only once, or arose independently in several places,
such as Egypt, the Indus Valley, China, Mexico and Central America. The
preponderance of archaeological data shows that the urbanizing Sumerians were the
first to develop writing, in 3,200 or 3,300 BC. These are the dates for many clay
tablets in an early form of cuneiform, a script written by pressing the end of a
sharpened stick into wet clay, found at the site of the ancient city of Uruk. The baked
clay tablets bore such images as pictorial symbols of the names of people, places
and things connected with government and commerce. The Sumerian script gradually
evolved from the pictorial to the abstract, but did not at first represent recorded
spoken language.
F. Peter Damerow, a specialist in Sumerian cuneiform at the Max Planck Institute for the

History of Science in Berlin, said, 'It is likely that there were mutual influences of
writing systems around the world. However, their great variety now shows that the
development of writing, once initiated, attains a considerable degree of independence
and flexibility to adapt to specific characteristics of the sounds of the language to be
represented. Not that he accepts the conventional view that writing started as a
representation of words by pictures. New studies of early Sumerian writing, he said,
challenge this interpretation. The structures of this earliest writing did not, for
example, match the structure of spoken language, dealing mainly in lists and
categories rather than in sentences and narrative.
G. For at least two decades, Dr. Denise Schmandt-Besserat, a University of Texas
archaeologist, has argued that the first writing grew directly out of a system practised
by Sumerian accountants. They used clay tokens, each one shaped to represent a
jar of oil, a container of grain or a particular kind of livestock. These tokens were
sealed inside clay spheres, and then the number and type of tokens inside was
recorded on the outside using impressions resembling the tokens. Eventually, the
token impressions were replaced with inscribed signs, and writing had been invented.
H. Though Dr. Schmandt-Besserat has won much support, some linguists question her
thesis, and others, like Dr. Pittman, think it too narrow. They emphasize that pictorial
representation and writing evolved together. 'There's no question that the token
system is a forerunner of writing', Dr. Pittman said, 'but I have an argument with her
evidence for a link between tokens and signs, and she doesn't open up the process
to include picture making.
I. Schmandt-Besserat vigorously defended her ideas. 'My colleagues say that pictures
were the beginning of writing' she said, 'but show me a single picture that becomes a
sign in writing. They say that designs on pottery were the beginning of writing, but
show me a single sign of writing you can trace back to a pot - it doesn't exist'. In its
first 500 years, she asserted, cuneiform writing was used almost solely for recording
economic information, and after that its uses multiplied and broadened.
J. Yet other scholars have advanced different ideas. Dr. Piotr Michalowski, Professor of
Near East Civilizations at the University of Michigan, said that the proto- writing of
Sumerian Uruk was 'so radically different as to be a complete break with the past'. It
no doubt served, he said, to store and communicate information, but also became a
new instrument of power. Some scholars noted that the origins of writing may not
always have been in economics. In Egypt, most early writing is high on monuments or
deep in tombs. In this case, said Dr. Pascal Vernus from a university in Paris, early
writing was less administrative than sacred. It seems that the only certainty in this field
is that many questions remain to be answered.

Questions 1-4

Choose the correct letter A, B, c or D

1. The researchers at the symposium regarded the story of the King of Uruk as ridiculous
because

A writing probably developed independently of speech.

B clay tablets had not been invented at that time.

C the distant ruler would have spoken another language.

D evidence of writing has been discovered from an earlier period.
2. According to the writer, the story of the King of Uruk

A is a probable explanation of the origins of writing.

B proves that early writing had a different function to writing today.

C provides an example of symbolic writing.

D shows some awareness amongst Sumerians of the purpose of writing

3. There was disagreement among the researchers at the symposium about

A the area where writing began.

B the nature of early writing materials.
C the way writing began

D the meaning of certain abstract images.

4. The opponents of the theory that writing developed from tokens believe that it

A grew out of accountancy.

B evolved from pictures.

C was initially intended as decoration.

D was unlikely to have been connected with commerce.


Questions 5-10

Look at the following statements (Questions 5-10) and the list of people below.

Match each statement with the correct person, A-E.

Write the correct letter, A-E, in boxes 5-10 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.
List of people
A. Dr. Holly Pittman

B. Dr. Peter Damerow

C. Dr. Denise Schmandt-Besserat

D. Dr. Piotr Michalowski

E. Dr. Pascal Vernus
5..................... There is no proof that early writing is connected to decorated household
objects

6..................... As writing developed, it came to represent speech.

7..................... Sumerian writing developed into a means of political control.

8..................... Early writing did not represent the grammatical features of speech.

9..................... There is no convincing proof that tokens and signs are connected.

10..................... The uses of cuneiform writing were narrow at first, and later widened.


Questions 37- 40

Complete the summary wing the list of words, A-N, below.

Write the correct letter, A-N, in boxes 37-40 on your answer sheet

The earliest form of writing

Most archaeological evidence shows that the people of 37..................... invented
writing in around 3,300 BC. Their script was written on 38..................... and was called
39...................... Their script originally showed images related to political power and
business, and later developed to become more 40.....................
A cuneiform B pictorial c tomb walls

D urban E legible F stone blocks
G simple H Mesopotamia I abstract

J papyrus sheets K decorative L clay tablets Uruk

M Egypt

Solution:

1. A 8. B
2. D 9. A

3. C 10. C
4. B 11. H

5. C 12. L
6. B 13. A

7. D 14. I
