TITLE: The politics of pessimism
INDEX: 525
============================================================

The politics of pessimism

Newspaper headlines and TV or radio news bulletins would have us believe erroneously
that a new age has come upon us, the Age of Cassandra. People are being assailed not
just with contemporary doom, or past gloom, but with prophecies of disasters about to
befall. The dawn of the new millennium has now passed; the earth is still intact, and the fin
de siècle Jeremiahs have now gone off to configure a new date for the apocalypse.

It can, I believe, be said with some certainty that the doom-mongers will never run out of
business. Human nature has an inclination for pessimism and anxiety, with each age
having its demagogues, foretelling doom or dragging it in their wake. But what makes the
modern age so different is that the catastrophes are more “in your face”, Their assault on
our senses is relentless. Whether it be sub-conscious or not, this is a situation not lost on
politicians. They play upon people’s propensity for unease, turning it into a very effective
political tool.

Deluding the general public

All too often, when politicians want to change the status quo, they take advantage of
people’s fears of the unknown and their uncertainties about the future. For example, details
about a new policy may be leaked to the press. Of course, tbe worst case scenario is
presented in all its depressing detail. When the general public reacts in horror, the
government appears to cave in. And then accepting some of the suggestions from their
critics, ministers water down their proposals. This allows the government to get what It
wants, while at the same time fooling the public into believing that they have got one over
on the government. Or even that they have some say in the making of policy.,

There are several principles at play here. And both are rather simple: unsettle people and
then play on their fears; and second, people must be given an opportunity to make a
contribution, howevser insignificant, in a given situation; otherwise, they become
dissatisfied, not fearful or anxious.
A similar ruse, at a local level, will further illustrate how easily people’s base fears are
exploited. A common practice is to give people a number of options, say in a housing
development, ranging from no change to radical transformation of an area. The aim is to
persuade people to agree significant modifications, which may involve disruption to their
lives, and possibly extra expenditure. The individuals, fearful of the worst possible
outcome, plump for the middle course. And this, incidentally, Is Invariably the option
favoured by the authorities. Everything is achieved under the guise of market research, But
It is obviously a blatant exercise in the manipulation of people’s fears.

Fear and survival

Fear and anxieties about the future affect us till. People are wracked with self-doubt and
low self-esteem. In the struggle to exist and advance in life, a seemingly endless string, of
obstacles is encountered, so ninny, in fact, that any accomplishment seems surprising.
Even when people do succeed they are still nagged by uncertainty,

Not surprisingly, feelings like doubt, fear, anxiety and pessimism are usually associated
with failure. Yet, if properly harnessed, they are the driving force behind success, the very
engines of genius.
If things turn out well for a long time, there is a further anxiety: that of constantly waiting for
something to go wrong. People then find themselves propitiating the gods: not walking on
lines on the pavements, performing rituals before public performances, wearing particular
clothes and colours so that they can blame the ritual not themselves when things go wrong,

But surely the real terror cornea when success continues uninterrupted for such a long
period of time that we forget what failure is like I

We crave for and are fed a daily diet of anxiety, Horror films and disaster movies have an
increasing appeal. Nostradamus pops his head up now and again, And other would-be
prophets make a brief appearance, predicting the demise of human kind. Perhaps h this is
all just a vestige of the hardships of early man – our attempt to recreate the struggles of a
past age, as life becomes mure and more comfortable.

Mankind cannot live by con tent meni alone. And so, a world awash with anxieties and
pessimism has been created. Being optimistic is a struggle. But survival dictates that
mankind remain ever sanguine.

Questions 1-5

Choose one phrase (A-K) from the List of phrases to complete each Key point below. Write
the appropriate letters (A-K) in Boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.

The information in the completed sentences should be an accurate summary of the points
made by the writer.

NB. There are more phrases (A-K) than sentences, so you wilt not need to use them all.
You may use each phrase once only.

Key points

1. Newspaper headlines and TV or radio news bulletins 1.....................

2. Doom-mongers are popular, because people 2.....................

3. Today, catastrophes 3.....................

4. To politicians, people’s Inclination for fear 4.....................
5. The government 5.....................

List of phrases

A are not as threatening as In the past

B tell the truth

C blame them

D try to make us believe mistakenly that we are In a new era

E calm people down

F are uncertain about the future
G are less comfortable

H are natural pessimists and worriers

I are more Immediate

J get what they want by deceiving the public

K is something they can make use of


Questions 6-9

Choose the appropriate letters A-D and write them in boxes 6-9 on your answer sheet.

6. The housing development example shows that people …

A are not that easily deceived

B like market research
C lead their fears

D are easy to delude

7. Which one of the following statements is true, according to the passage?

A Market research uses people’s fears for their own good

B People are scared by market research techniques
C Market research techniques are used as a means of taking advantage of people’s
fears

D Market research makes people happy

8. The engines of genius are …

A properly harnessed

B the driving force behind success

C driven by feelings like fear

D usually associated with failure

9. Continual success …

A makes people arrogant
B worries people

C does not have any negative effects on people

D increases people’s self-esteem


Questions 10-13

Do the statements below agree with the information in Reading Passage 1?

In Boxes 10-13, write:

YES if the statement agrees with the information in the passage

NO if the statement contradicts the information in the passage

NOT GIVEN if there is no information about the statement in the passage

Example: Politicians pretend things are worse than they are.

Answer: YES.
10..................... The complex relationship between failure and success needs to be
addressed carefully.
11..................... People perform certain rituals to try to avoid failure.

12..................... Anxiety in daily life is what we want.
13..................... The writer believes that Nostradamus and certain other prophets are right
about their predictions for the end of the human race.

Solution:

1. D 8. C
2. H 9. B

3. I 10. NOT GIVEN
4. K 11. YES

5. J 12. YES
6. A 13. NOT GIVEN

7. C
