TITLE: The Problem of Scarce Resources
INDEX: 530
============================================================

The Problem of Scarce Resources

Section A

The problem of how health-care resources should be allocated or apportioned, so that they
are distributed in both, the most just and most efficient way, is not a new one. Every health
system in an economically developed society is faced with the need to decide (either
formally or informally) what proportion of the community’s total resources should be spent
on health-care; how resources are to be apportioned; what diseases and disabilities and
which forms of treatment are to be given priority; which members of the community are to
be given special consideration in respect of their health needs; and which forms of
treatment are the most cost-effective.
Section B

What is new is that, from the 1950s onwards, there have been certain general changes in
outlook about the finitude of resources as a whole and of health-care resources in
particular, as well as more specific changes regarding the clientele of health-care
resources and the cost to the community of those resources. Thus, in the 1950s and
1960s, there emerged an awareness in Western societies that resources for the provision
of fossil fuel energy were finite and exhaustible and that the capacity of nature or the
environment to sustain economic development and population was also finite. In other
words, we became aware of the obvious fact that there were ‘limits to growth’. The new
consciousness that there were also severe limits to health-care resources was part of this
general revelation of the obvious. Looking back, it now seems quite incredible that in the
national health systems that emerged in many countries in the years immediately after the

1939-45 World War, it was assumed without question that all the basic health needs of any
community could be satisfied, at least in principle; the ‘invisible hand’ of economic progress
would provide.

Section C
However, at exactly the same time as this new realisation of the finite character of health-
care resources was sinking in, an awareness of a contrary kind was developing in Western
societies: that people have a basic right to health-care as a necessary condition of a proper
human life. Like education, political and legal processes and institutions, public order,
communication, transport and money supply, health-care came to be seen as one of the
fundamental social facilities necessary for people to exercise their other rights as
autonomous human beings. People are not in a position to exer- | cise personal liberty and
to be self-determining if they are poverty-stricken, or deprived of basic education, or do not
live within a context of law and order. In the same way, basic health-care is a condition of
the exercise of autonomy.

Section D

Although the language of ‘rights’ sometimes leads to confusion, by the late 1970s it was
recognised in most societies that people have a right to health-care (though there has been
considerable resistance in the United States to the idea that there is a formal right to
health-care). It is also accepted that this right generates an obligation or duty for the state
to ensure that adequate health-care resources are provided out of the public purse. The
state has no obligation to provide a health-care system itself, but to ensure that such a
system is provided. Put another way, basic health-care is now recognised as a ‘public
good’, rather than a ‘private good’ that one is expected to buy for oneself. As the 1976
declaration of the World Health Organisation put it: ‘The enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of health is one of the fundamental rights of every human being without distinction
of race, religion, political belief, economic or social condition.’ As has just been remarked,
in a liberal society basic health is seen as one of the indispensable conditions for the
exercise of personal autonomy.

Section E

Just at the time when it became obvious that health-care resources could not possibly meet
the demands being made upon them, people were demanding that their fundamental right
to health-care be satisfied by the state. The second set of more specific changes that have
led to the present concern about the distribution of health-care resources stems from the
dramatic rise in health costs in most OECD1 countries, accompanied by large-scale
demographic and social changes which have meant, to take one example, that elderly
people are now major (and relatively very expensive) consumers of health-care resources.
Thus in OECD countries as a whole, health costs increased from 3.8% of GDP1 2 in 1960
to 7% of GDP in 1980, and it has been predicted that the proportion of health costs to GDP
will continue to increase. (In the US the current figure is about 12% of GDP, and in

Australia about 7.8% of GDP)
As a consequence, during the 1980s a kind of doomsday scenario (analogous to similar
doomsday extrapolations about energy needs and fossil fuels or about population
increases) was projected by health administrators, economists and politicians, i In this
scenario, ever-rising health costs were matched against static or declining resources.


1Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development

2Gross Domestic Product

Questions 1-4

Reading Passage has five sections A-E.

Choose the correct heading for sections A and C-E from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number i-viii in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.


List of
Headings
i The
connection
between
health-
care and
other
human
rights
ii The
developme
nt of
market-
based
1..................... Section A
health
Example Answer systems
iii The role
Secti
viii
of the
on B
state in
2..................... Section C health-
care
3..................... Section D
iv A
4..................... Section E problem
shared by
every
economica
lly
developed
country
v The
impact of
recent
change
vi The
views of
the
medical
establishm
ent
vii The
end of an
illusion
viii
Sustainabl
e
economic
developme
nt


Questions 5-8

Classify the following as first occurring


A between 1945 and 1950

B between 1950 and 1980
C after 1980


Write the correct letter A, B or C in boxes 5-8 on your answer sheet.


5..................... the realisation that the resources of the national health systems were limited
6..................... a sharp rise in the cost of health-care

7..................... a belief that all the health-care resources the community needed would be
produced by economic growth

8..................... an acceptance of the role of the state in guaranteeing the provision of
health-care


Questions 36-40

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage?
In boxes 9-13 on your answer sheet write

YES if the statement agrees with the views of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the views of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
9..................... Personal liberty and independence have never been regarded as directly
linked to health-care.

10..................... Health-care came to be seen as a right at about the same time that the
limits of healthcare resources became evident.

11..................... In OECD countries population changes have had an impact on health-care
costs in recent years.

12..................... OECD governments have consistently underestimated the level of health-
care provision needed.

13..................... In most economically developed countries the elderly will have to make
special provision for their health-care in the future.

Solution:

1. iv 8. B
2. i 9. NO

3. iii 10. YES
4. v 11. YES

5. B 12. NOT GIVEN
6. B 13. NOT GIVEN

7. A
