TITLE: The reconstruction of community in Talbot Park,
INDEX: 533
============================================================

The reconstruction of community in Talbot Park,

Auckland

A. An architecture of disguise is almost complete at Talbot Park in the heart of Auckland’s
Glen Innes. The place was once described as a state housing ghetto, rife with crime,
vandalism and other social problems. But today after a $48 million urban renewal
makeover, the site is home to 700 residents — 200 more than before — and has people
regularly inquiring whether they can buy or rent there. “It doesn’t look like social housing,”
Housing New Zealand housing services manager Dene Busby says of the tidy brick and
weatherboard apartments and townhouses which would look just as much at home in
“there is no reason why public housing should look cheap in my view,” says Design Group
architect Neil of the eight three-bedroom terrace houses his firm designed.


B. Talbot Park is a triangle of government-owned land bounded by Apirana Ave, Pilkington

Rd and Point England Rd. In the early 1960s it was developed for state housing built
around a linear park that ran through the middle. Initially, there was a strong sense of a
family-friendly community. Former residents recall how the Talbot Park reserve played a
big part in their childhoods — a place where the kids in the block came together to play
softball, cricket, tiggy, leapfrog and bullrush. Sometimes they’d play “Maoris against
Pakehas” but without any animosity. “It was all just good fun”, says Georgie Thompson in
Ben Schrader’s We Call it Home: A History of State Housing in New Zealand. “We had
respect for our neighbours and addressed them by title Mr. and Mrs. soand-so,” she
recalls.


C. Quite what went wrong with Talbot Park is not clear. We call it Home Records that the
community began to change in the late 1970s as more Pacific Islanders and Europeans
moved in. The new arrivals didn’t readily integrate with the community, a “them and us”
mentality developed, and residents interacted with their neighbours less. What was clear
was the buildings were deteriorating and becoming dilapidated, petty crime was on the rise
and the reserve — focus of fond childhood memories — had become a wasteland and was
considered unsafe.


D. But it wasn’t until 2002 that Housing New Zealand decided the properties needed
upgrading. The master renewal plan didn’t take advantage of the maximum
accommodation density allowable (one unit per 100 sq metres ) but did increase density to
one emit per 180 sq m by refurbishing all 108 star flat units, removing the multis and
building 111 new home. The Talbot strategy can be summed up as mix, match and
manage. Mix up the housing with variety plans from a mix of architects, match house styles
to what7 s built by the private sector, match tenants to the mix, and manage their
occupancy. Inevitably cost comes into the equation.” If you’re going to build low cost
homes, you’ve got to keep them simple and you can’t afford a fancy bit on them. ” says
Michael Thompson of Architectus which designed the innovative threelevel Atrium
apartments lining two sides of a covered courtyard. At $300,000 per two bedroom unit, the
building is more expensive but provides for independent disabled accommodation as well
as offering solar hot water heating and rainwater collection for toilet cisterns and outside
taps.


E. The renewal project budget at $1.5 million which will provide park pathways, planting,
playgrounds, drinking fountains, seating, skateboard rails, a half-size basketball hard court,
and a pavilion. But if there was any doubt this is a low socio-economic area, the
demographics for the surrounding Tamaki area are sobering. Of the 5000 households
there, 55 percent are state houses, 28 per cent privately owned (compared to about 65
percent nationally) and 17 percent are private rental. The area has a high concentration of
households with incomes in the $5000 to $15,000 range and very few with an income over
$70,000. That’s in sharp contrast to the more affluent suburbs like Kohimarama and St
John’s that surround the area.


F. “The design is for people with different culture background,” says architect James
Lunday of Common Ground which designed the 21 large family homes. “Architecturally we
decided to be relatively conservative — nice house in its own garden with a bit of space
and good indoor outdoor flow.” There’s a slight reflection of the whare and a Pacific fale,
but not overplayed “The private sector is way behind in urban design and sustainable
futures,” says Bracey. “Redesigning sheets and parks is a big deal and very difficult to do.

The private sector won’t do it, because It’s so hard.”


G. There’s no doubt good urban design and good architecture play a significant part in the
scheme. But probably more important is a new standard of social control. Housing New
Zealand calls it “intensive tenancy management”. Others view it as social engineering. “It’s
a model that we are looking at going forward,” according to Housing New Zealand’s central
Auckland regional manager Graham Bodman.1 The focus is on frequent inspections,
helping tenants to get to know each other and trying to create an environment of respect for
neighbours, ” says Bodman. That includes some strict rules — no loud parties after 10 pm,
no dogs, no cats in the apartments, no washing hung over balcony rails and a requirement
to mow lawns and keep the property tidy. Housing New Zealand has also been active in
organising morning teas and sheet barbecues for residents to meet their neighbours. “IVs
all based on the intensification,” says Community Renewal project manager Stuart Bracey.
“We acknowledge if you are going to put more people living closer together, you have to
actually help them to live closer together because it creates tension — especially for people
that aren’t used to it.”

Questions 1-7

Reading Passage has seven paragraphs, A-G.
Choose the correct heading for paragraphs, A-G from the list below.

Write the correct number, i-xi, in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet.

List of Headings
i Financial hardship of community
ii A good tendency of strengthening the supervision
iii Details of plans for the community’s makeover and upgrade
iv Architecture suits families of various ethnic origins
v Problems arise then the mentality of alienation developed later
vi Introduction of a social housing community with unexpected high standard
vii A practical design and need assist and cooperate in future
viii closer relationship among neighbors in original site
ix different need from a makeup of a low financial background should be considered
x How to make the community feel safe
xi a plan with details for house structure

1..................... Paragraph A
2..................... Paragraph B
3..................... Paragraph C
4..................... Paragraph D
5..................... Paragraph E

6..................... Paragraph F
7..................... Paragraph G


Questions 8-10

Use the information in the passage to match the people (listed A-E) with opinions or deeds
below.
Write the appropriate letters, A-E, in boxes 8-10 on your answer sheet.
8..................... Design should meet the need of mix-raced cultural background
9..................... for better living environment, regulations and social control should be
imperative
10..................... organising more community’s activities helps strengthening relationship in
community
List of people

A Michael Thompson
B Graham Bodman
C Stuart Bracey
D James Lunday
E Dene Busby


Questions 11-14

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 11-14 on your answer sheet.

In the year 2002, the Talbot decided to raise housing standard, yet the plan was to build
homes go much beyond the accommodation limit and people complain about the high
living 11...................... And as the variety plans were complemented under the designs of
many 12..................... together, made house styles go with the part designed by
individuals, matched tenants from different culture. As for the finance, reconstruction
program’s major concern is to build a house within low 13.....................; finally, just as
expert predicted residents will agree on building a relatively conventional house in its
own 14....................., which provides considerable space to move around

Solution:

1. vi 8. D
2. viii 9. B

3. v 10. C
4. iii 11. density

5. ix 12. architects
6. vii 13. budget

7. ii 14. garden
