TITLE: The Risks of Cigarette Smoke
INDEX: 540
============================================================

The Risks of Cigarette Smoke


Discovered in the early 1800s and named nicotianine, the oily essence now called nicotine
is the main active ingredient of tobacco. Nicotine, however, is only a small component of
cigarette smoke, which contains more than 4,700 chemical compounds, including 43
cancer-causing substances. In recent times, scientific research has been providing
evidence that years of cigarette smoking vastly increases the risk of developing fatal
medical conditions.
In addition to being responsible for more than 85 per cent of lung cancers, smoking is
associated with cancers of, amongst others, the mouth, stomach and kidneys, and is
thought to cause about 14 per cent of leukemia and cervical cancers. In 1990, smoking
caused more than 84,000 deaths, mainly resulting from such problems as pneumonia,
bronchitis and influenza. Smoking, it is believed, is responsible for 30 per cent of all deaths
from cancer and clearly represents the most important preventable cause of cancer in
countries like the United States today.

Passive smoking, the breathing in of the side-stream smoke from the burning of tobacco
between puffs or of the smoke exhaled by a smoker, also causes a serious health risk. A
report published in 1992 by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) emphasized
the health dangers, especially from side-stream smoke. This type of smoke contains more,
smaller particles and is therefore more likely to be deposited deep in the lungs. On the
basis of this report, the EPA has classified environmental tobacco smoke in the highest risk
category for causing cancer.

As an illustration of the health risks, in the case of a married couple where one partner is a
smoker and one a non-smoker, the latter is believed to have a 30 per cent higher risk of
death from heart disease because of passive smoking. The risk of lung cancer also
increases over the years of exposure and the figure jumps to 80 per cent if the spouse has
been smoking four packs a day for 20 years. It has been calculated that 17 per cent of
cases of lung cancer can be attributed to high levels of exposure to second-hand tobacco
smoke during childhood and adolescence.

A more recent study by researchers at the University of California at San Francisco (UCSF)
has shown that second-hand cigarette smoke does more harm to non-smokers than to
smokers. Leaving aside the philosophical question of whether anyone should have to
breathe someone else's cigarette smoke, the report suggests that the smoke experienced
by many people in their daily lives is enough to produce substantial adverse effects on a
person's heart and lungs.
The report, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association (AMA), was
based on the researchers' own earlier research but also includes a review of studies over
the past few years. The American Medical Association represents about half of all US
doctors and is a strong opponent of smoking. The study suggests that people who smoke
cigarettes are continually damaging their cardiovascular system, which adapts in order to
compensate for the effects of smoking. It further states that people who do not smoke do
not have the benefit of their system adapting to the smoke inhalation. Consequently, the
effects of passive smoking are far greater on non-smokers than on smokers.
This report emphasizes that cancer is not caused by a single element in cigarette smoke;
harmful effects to health are caused by many components. Carbon monoxide, for example,
competes with oxygen in red blood cells and interferes with the blood's ability to deliver life
giving oxygen to the heart. Nicotine and other toxins in cigarette smoke activate small
blood cells called platelets, which increases the likelihood of blood clots, thereby affecting
blood circulation throughout the body.
The researchers criticize the practice of some scientific consultants who work with the
tobacco industry for assuming that cigarette smoke has the same impact on smokers as it
does on non-smokers. They argue that those scientists are underestimating the damage
done by passive smoking and, in support of their recent findings, cite some previous
research which points to passive smoking as the cause for between 30,000 and 60,000
deaths from heart attacks each year in the United States. This means that passive smoking
is the third most preventable cause of death after active smoking and alcohol-related
diseases.

The study argues that the type of action needed against passive smoking should be similar
to that being taken against illegal drugs and AIDS (SIDA). The UCSF researchers maintain
that the simplest and most cost-effective action is to establish smoke-free work places,
schools and public places.

Questions 1-3

Choose the appropriate letters A—D and write them in boxes 1-3 on your answer sheet.


1 According to information in the text, leukaemia and pneumonia

A are responsible for 84,000 deaths each year.

B are strongly linked to cigarette smoking.
C are strongly linked to lung cancer.

D result in 30 per cent of deaths per year.


2 According to information in the text, intake of carbon monoxide

A inhibits the flow of oxygen to the heart.

B increases absorption of other smoke particles.

C inhibits red blood cell formation.

D promotes nicotine absorption.


3 According to information in the text, intake of nicotine encourages

A blood circulation through the body.

B activity of other toxins in the blood.

C formation of blood clots.

D an increase of platelets in the blood.


Questions 4-7

Do the following statements reflect the claims of the writer in Reading Passage?

In boxes 4-7 on your answer sheet write

YES if the statement reflects the claims of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this


4..................... Thirty per cent of deaths in the United States are caused by smoking-related
diseases.
5..................... If one partner in a marriage smokes, the other is likely to take up smoking.

6..................... Teenagers whose parents smoke are at risk of getting lung cancer at some
time during their lives.

7..................... Opponents of smoking financed the UCSF study.


Questions 8-10

Choose ONE phrase from the list of phrases A-J below to complete each of the following
sentences (Questions 8-10).

Write the appropriate letters in boxes 8-10 on your answer sheet.


Aincludes reviews of studies in its reports.

Bargues for stronger action against smoking in public places.
Cis one of the two most preventable causes of death.
8 Passive smoking 8.....................
Dis more likely to be at risk from passive smoking diseases.
9 Compared with a non-smoker, a
Eis more harmful to non-smokers than to smokers.
smoker 9.....................
F is less likely to be at risk of contracting lung cancer.
10 The American Medical
Gis more likely to be at risk of contracting various cancers.
Association 10.....................
Hopposes smoking and publishes research on the subject.
I is just as harmful to smokers as it is to non-smokers.
J reduces the quantity of blood flowing around the body.


Questions 11-14

Classify the following statements as being


A a finding of the UCSF study

B an opinion of the UCSF study

C a finding of the EPA report

D an assumption of consultants to the tobacco industry


Write the appropriate letters A-D in boxes 11-14 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.
11..................... Smokers’ cardiovascular systems adapt to the intake of environmental
smoke.

12..................... There is a philosophical question as to whether people should have to
inhale others’ smoke.

13..................... Smoke-free public places offer the best solution.

14..................... The intake of side-stream smoke is more harmful than smoke exhaled by a
smoker.

Solution:

1. B 8. E
2. A 9. G

3. C 10. H
4. NO 11. A

5. NOT GIVEN 12. B
6. YES 13. B

7. NOT GIVEN 14. C
