TITLE: The Search for Extra-terrestrial Intelligence
INDEX: 546
============================================================

The Search for Extra-terrestrial Intelligence


The question of whether we are alone in the Universe has haunted humanity for
centuries, but we may now stand poised on the brink of the answer to that question, as we
search for radio signals from other intelligent civilisations. This search, often known by the
acronym SETI (search for extra-terrestrial intelligence], is a difficult one. Although groups
around the world have been searching intermittently for three decades, it is only now that
we have reached the level of technology where we can make a determined attempt to
search all nearby stars for any sign of life.

A
The primary reason for the search is basic curiosity - the same curiosity about the natural
world that drives all pure science. We want to know whether we are alone in the
Universe. We want to know whether life evolves naturally if given the right conditions, or
whether there is something very special about the Earth to have fostered the variety of life
forms that we see around us on the planet. The simple detection of a radio signal will be
sufficient to answer this most basic of all questions. In this sense, SETI is another cog in
the machinery of pure science which is continually pushing out the horizon of our
knowledge. However, there are other reasons for being interested in whether life exists
elsewhere. For example, we have had civilisation on Earth for perhaps only a few thousand
years, and the threats of nuclear war and pollution over the last few decades have told us
that our survival may be tenuous. Will we last another two thousand years or will we wipe
ourselves out? Since the lifetime of a planet like ours is several billion years, we can expect
that, if other civilisations do survive in our galaxy, their ages will range from zero to several
billion years. Thus any other civilisation that we hear from is likely to be far older, on
average, than ourselves. The mere existence of such a civilisation will tell us that long-term
survival is possible, and gives us some cause for optimism. It is even possible that the
older civilisation may pass on the benefits of their experience in dealing with threats to
survival such as nuclear war and global pollution, and other threats that we haven’t yet
discovered.

B

In discussing whether we are alone, most SETI scientists adopt two ground rules. First,
UFQs (Unidentified Flying Objects) are generally ignored since most scientists
don’t consider the evidence for them to be strong enough to bear serious
consideration (although it is also important to keep an open mind in case any really
convincing evidence emerges in the future). Second, we make a very conservative
assumption that we are looking for a life form that is pretty well like us, since if it differs
radically from us we may well not recognise it as a life form, quite apart from whether we
are able to communicate with it. In other words, the life form we are looking for may well
have two green heads and seven fingers, but it will nevertheless resemble us in that it
should communicate with its fellows, be interested in the Universe, live on a planet orbiting
a star like our Sun, and perhaps most restrictively, have a chemistry, like us, based on
carbon and water.

C
Even when we make these assumptions, our understanding of other life forms is still
severely limited. We do not even know, for example, how many stars have planets, and
we certainly do not know how likely it is that life will arise naturally, given the right
conditions. However, when we look at the 100 billion stars in our galaxy (the Milky Way),
and 100 billion galaxies in the observable Universe, it seems inconceivable that at least
one of these planets does not have a life form on it; in fact, the best educated guess we
can make, using the little that we do know about the conditions for carbon-based life, leads
us to estimate that perhaps one in 100,000 stars might have a life-bearing planet orbiting it.
That means that our nearest neighbours are perhaps 100 light years away, which is almost
next door in astronomical terms.

D

An alien civilisation could choose many different ways of sending information across the
galaxy, but many of these either require too much energy, or else are severely
attenuated while traversing the vast distances across the galaxy. It turns out that, for a
given amount of transmitted power, radio waves in the frequency range 1000 to 3000 MHz
travel the greatest distance, and so all searches to date have concentrated on looking for
radio waves in this frequency range. So far there have been a number of searches by
various groups around the world, including Australian searches using the radio telescope at
Parkes, New South Wales. Until now there have not been any detections from the few
hundred stars which have been searched. The scale of the searches has been increased
dramatically since 1992, when the US Congress voted NASA $10 million per year for ten
years to conduct a thorough search for extra-terrestrial life. Much of the money in this
project is being spent on developing the special hardware needed to search many
frequencies at once. The project has two parts. One part is a targeted search using the
world’s largest radio telescopes, the American-operated telescope in Arecibo, Puerto Rico
and the French telescope in Nancy in France. This part of the project is searching the
nearest 1000 likely stars with high sensitivity for signals in the frequency range 1000 to
3000 MHz. The other part of the project is an undirected search which is monitoring all of
space with a lower sensitivity, using the smaller antennas of NASA’s Deep Space Network.
E

There is considerable debate over how we should react if we detect a signal from an alien
civilisation. Everybody agrees that we should not reply immediately. Quite apart from
the impracticality of sending a reply over such large distances at short notice, it raises a
host of ethical questions that would have to be addressed by the global community before
any reply could be sent. Would the human race face the culture shock if faced with a
superior and much older civilisation? Luckily, there is no urgency about this. The stars
being searched are hundreds of light years away, so it takes hundreds of years for their
signal to reach us, and a further few hundred years for our reply to reach them. It’s not
important, then, if there’s a delay of a few years, or decades, while the human race debates
the question of whether to reply, and perhaps carefully drafts a reply.

Questions 1-4

Reading Passage has five paragraphs, A-E.

Choose the correct heading for paragraphs B-E from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-vii, in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.


List of
Headings
i Seeking
the
transmissio
n of radio
signals from
planets
ii
Appropriat
e responses
to signals
from other
civilisations
iii Vast
Example Answer distances to
Earth’s
Paragraph A v closest
neighbours

1 Paragraph B 1..................... iv
Assumpti
2 Paragraph C 2.....................
ons
3 Paragraph D 3..................... underlying
the search
4 Paragraph E 4.....................
for extra-
terrestrial
intelligence
v
Reasons
for the
search for
extra-
terrestrial
intelligence
vi
Knowledg
e of extra-
terrestrial
life forms
vii
Likelihood
of life on
other
planets


Questions 5-7

Answer the questions below.

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER from the passage for
each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 5-7 on your answer sheet.

5 What is the life expectancy of Earth? 5.....................

6 What kind of signals from other intelligent civilisations are SETI scientists
searching for? 6.....................

7 How many stars are the world’s most powerful radio telescopes searching?
7.....................


Questions 8-13

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage?

In boxes 8-13 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement agrees with the views of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the views of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

8..................... Alien civilisations may be able to help the human race to overcome
serious problems.

9..................... SETI scientists are trying to find a life form that resembles humans in
many ways.

10..................... The Americans and Australians have co-operated on joint research
projects.

11..................... So far SETI scientists have picked up radio signals from several stars.
12..................... The NASA project attracted criticism from some members of Congress.

13..................... If a signal from outer space is received, it will be important to respond
promptly.

Solution:

1. iv 8. YES
2. vii 9. YES

10. NOT
3. i
GIVEN
4. ii 11. NO
12. NOT
5. several billion years
GIVEN
6. radio (waves/signals) 13. NO
7. 1000 (stars)
