TITLE: The True Cost of Food
INDEX: 558
============================================================

The True Cost of Food


A

For more than forty years the cost of food has been rising. It has now reached a point
where a growing number of people believe that it is far too high, and that bringing it down
will be one of the great challenges of the twenty first century. That cost, however, is not
in immediate cash. In the West at least, most food is now far cheaper to buy in relative
terms than it was in 1960.

The cost is in the collateral damage of the very methods of food production that have made
the food cheaper: in the pollution of water, the enervation of soil, the destruction of wildlife,
the harm to animal welfare and the threat to human health caused by modern industrial
agriculture.
B

First mechanisation, then mass use of chemical fertilisers and pesticides, then
monocultures, then battery rearing of livestock, and now genetic engineering - the onward
march of intensive farming has seemed unstoppable in the last half-century, as the yields
of produce have soared. But the damage it has caused has been colossal. In Britain, for
example, many of our best-loved farmland birds, such as the skylark, the grey partridge,
the lapwing and the corn bunting, have vanished from huge stretches of countryside, as
have even more wild flowers and insects. This is a direct result of the way we have
produced our food in the last four decades. Thousands of miles of hedgerows, thousands
of ponds, have disappeared from the landscape. The faecal filth of salmon farming has
driven wild salmon from many of the sea lochs and rivers of Scotland. Natural soil fertility is
dropping in many areas because of continuous industrial fertiliser and pesticide use, while
the growth of algae is increasing in lakes because of the fertiliser run-off.

C

Put it all together and it looks like a battlefield, but consumers rarely make the connection
at the dinner table. That is mainly because the costs of all this damage are what
economists refer to as externalities: they are outside the main transaction, which is for
example producing and selling a field of wheat, and are borne directly by neither producers
nor consumers. To many, the costs may not even appear to be financial at all, but merely
aesthetic - a terrible shame, but nothing to do with money. And anyway they, as consumers
of food, certainly aren’t paying for it, are they?

D

But the costs to society can actually be quantified and, when added up, can amount to
staggering sums. A remarkable exercise in doing this has been carried out by one of the
world’s leading thinkers on the future of agriculture, Professor Jules Pretty, Director of the
Centre for Environment and Society at the University of Essex. Professor Pretty and his
colleagues calculated the externalities of British agriculture for one particular year. They
added up the costs of repairing the damage it caused, and came up with a total figure of
£2,343m. This is equivalent to £208 for every hectare of arable land and permanent
pasture, almost as much again as the total government and EU spend on British farming in
that year. And according to Professor Pretty, it was a conservative estimate.

E

The costs included: £120m for removal of pesticides; £16m for removal of nitrates; £55m
for removal of phosphates and soil; £23m for the removal of the bug Cryptosporidium from
drinking water by water companies; £125m for damage to wildlife habitats, hedgerows and
dry stone walls; £1,113m from emissions of gases likely to contribute to climate change;
£106m from soil erosion and organic carbon losses; £169m from food poisoning; and
£607m from cattle disease. Professor Pretty draws a simple but memorable conclusion
from all this: our food bills are actually threefold. We are paying for our supposedly cheaper
food in three separate ways: once over the counter, secondly through our taxes, which
provide the enormous subsidies propping up modern intensive farming, and thirdly to clean
up the mess that modern farming leaves behind.

F
So can the true cost of food be brought down? Breaking away from industrial agriculture as
the solution to hunger may be very hard for some countries, but in Britain, where
the immediate need to supply food is less urgent, and the costs and the damage
of intensive farming have been clearly seen, it may be more feasible. The
government needs to create sustainable, competitive and diverse farming and food sectors,
which will contribute to a thriving and sustainable rural economy, and advance
environmental, economic, health, and animal welfare goals.

G

But if industrial agriculture is to be replaced, what is a viable alternative? Professor Pretty
feels that organic farming would be too big a jump in thinking and in practices for many
farmers. Furthermore, the price premium would put the produce out of reach of many
poorer consumers. He is recommending the immediate introduction of a'Greener Food
Standard’, which would push the market towards more sustainable environmental practices
than the current norm, while not requiring the full commitment to organic production. Such
a standard would comprise agreed practices for different kinds of farming, covering
agrochemical use, soil health, land management, water and energy use, food safety and
animal health. It could go a long way, he says, to shifting consumers as well as farmers
towards a more sustainable system of agriculture.

Questions 1-4

Reading Passage has seven paragraphs, A-G.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.

1..................... a cost involved in purifying domestic water
2..................... the stages in the development of the farming industry

3..................... the term used to describe hidden costs

4..................... one effect of chemicals on water sources


Questions 5-8

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage?

In boxes 5-8 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

5..................... Several species of wildlife in the British countryside are declining.

6..................... The taste of food has deteriorated in recent years.

7..................... The financial costs of environmental damage are widely recognised.
8..................... One of the costs calculated by Professor Pretty was illness caused by
food.


Questions 9-13

Complete the summary below.

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 22-26 on your answer sheet.


Professor Pretty concludes that our 9..................... are higher than most people realise,
because we make three different types of payment. He feels it is realistic to suggest that
Britain should reduce its reliance on 10...................... Although most farmers would be
unable to adapt to 11...................... Professor Pretty wants the government to initiate
change by establishing what he refers to as a 12...................... He feels this would help
to change the attitudes of both 13......................
4

Solution:

1. E 8. YES
2. B 9. food bills/costs

10. (modern) intensive
3. C
farming
4. B 11. organic farming
5. YES 12. Greener Food Standard

6. NOT 13. IN EITHER ORDER
GIVEN farmers (and) consumers
7. NO
