TITLE: The truth about lying
INDEX: 559
============================================================

The truth about lying

Over the years Richard Wiseman has tried to unravel the truth about deception -
investigating the signs that give away a liar.

A

In the 1970s, as part of a large-scale research programme exploring the area of
Interspecies communication, Dr Francine Patterson from Stanford University attempted to
teach two lowland gorillas called Michael and Koko a simplified version of Sign Language.
According to Patterson, the great apes were capable of holding meaningful conversations,
and could even reflect upon profound topics, such as love and death. During the project,
their trainers believe they uncovered instances where the two gorillas' linguistic skills
seemed to provide reliable evidence of intentional deceit. In one example, Koko broke a toy
cat, and then signed to indicate that the breakage had been caused by one of her trainers.
In another episode, Michael ripped a jacket belonging to a trainer and, when asked who
was responsible for the incident, signed ‘Koko’. When the trainer expressed some
scepticism, Michael appeared to change his mind, and indicated that Dr Patterson was
actually responsible, before finally confessing.

B
Other researchers have explored the development of deception in children. Some of the
most interesting experiments have involved asking youngsters not to take a peek at their
favourite toys. During these studies, a child is led into a laboratory and asked to face one of
the walls. The experimenter then explains that he is going to set up an elaborate toy a few
feet behind them. After setting up the toy, the experimenter says that he has to leave the
laboratory, and asks the child not to turn around and peek at the toy. The child is secretly
filmed by hidden cameras for a few minutes, and then the experimenter returns and asks
them whether they peeked. Almost all three-year-olds do, and then half of them lie about it
to the experimenter. By the time the children have reached the age of five, all of them peek
and all of them lie. The results provide compelling evidence that lying starts to emerge the
moment we learn to speak.
C

So what are the tell-tale signs that give away a lie? In 1994, the psychologist Richard
Wiseman devised a large-scale experiment on a TV programme called Tomorrow's

World. As part of the experiment, viewers watched two interviews in which Wiseman asked
a presenter in front of the cameras to describe his favourite film. In one interview, the
presenter picked Some Like It Hot and he told the truth; in the other interview, he picked
Gone with the Wind and lied. The viewers were then invited to make a choice - to
telephone in to say which film he was lying about. More than 30,000 calls were received,
but viewers were unable to tell the difference and the vote was a 50/50 split. In similar
experiments, the results have been remarkably consistent - when it comes to lie detection,
people might as well simply toss a coin. It doesn’t matter if you are male or female, young
or old; very few people are able to detect deception.

D
Why is this? Professor Charles Bond from the Texas Christian University has conducted
surveys into the sorts of behaviour people associate with lying. He has interviewed
thousands of people from more than 60 countries, asking them to describe how they set
about telling whether someone is lying. People’s answers are remarkably consistent.
Almost everyone thinks liars tend to avert their gaze, nervously wave their hands around
and shift about in their seats. There is, however, one small problem. Researchers have
spent hour upon hour carefully comparing films of liars and truth-tellers. The results are
clear. Liars do not necessarily look away from you; they do not appear nervous and move
their hands around or shift about in their seats. People fail to detect lies because they are
basing their opinions on behaviours that are not actually associated with deception.

E

So what are we missing? It is obvious that the more information you give away, the greater
the chances of some of it coming back to haunt you. As a result, liars tend to say less and
provide fewer details than truth-tellers. Looking back at the transcripts of the interviews with
the presenter, his lie about Gone with the Wind contained about 40 words, whereas the
truth about Some Like It Hot was nearly twice as long. People who lie also try
psychologically to keep a distance from their falsehoods, and so tend to include fewer
references to themselves in their stories. In his entire interview about Gone with the Wind,
the presenter only once mentioned how the film made him feel, compared with the several
references to his feelings when he talked about Some Like It Hot.
F

The simple fact is that the real clues to deceit are in the words that people use, not the
body language. So do people become better lie detectors when they listen to a liar, or even
just read a transcript of their comments? The interviews with the presenter were also
broadcast on radio and published in a newspaper, and although the lie-detecting abilities of
the television viewers were no better than chance, the newspaper readers were correct
64% of the time, and the radio listeners scored an impressive 73% accuracy rate.

adapted from The National Newspaper

Questions 1-6

The reading passage has six paragraphs, A-F.

Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.

1..................... Paragraph A

2..................... Paragraph B

3..................... Paragraph C
4..................... Paragraph D

5..................... Paragraph E

6..................... Paragraph F


List of headings
i Some of the things liars really do
ii When do we begin to lie?

iii How wrong is it to lie?

iv Exposing some false beliefs
v Which form of communication best exposes a lie?
vi Do only humans lie?

vii Dealing with known liars
viii A public test of our ability to spot a lie


Questions 7-10

Look at the following statements and the list of experiments below.

Match each statement with the correct experiment, A-C.

You may use any letter more than once.

7..................... Someone who was innocent was blamed for something.

8..................... Those involved knew they were being filmed.
9..................... Some objects were damaged.

10..................... Some instructions were ignored.


List of Experiments
A the gorilla experiment
B the experiment with children

C the TV experiment


Questions 11-13

Complete the sentences below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

11 Filming liars has shown that they do not display 11..................... behaviour.

12 Liars tend to avoid talking about their own 12.....................

13 Signs of lying are exposed in people’s 13..................... rather than their
movements.

Solution:

1. vi 8. C
2. ii 9. A

3. viii 10. B
4. iv 11. nervous

5. i 12. feelings
6. v 13. words

7. A
