TITLE: Tool for ancient writing
INDEX: 580
============================================================

Tool for ancient writing

{A} With time, the record-keepers developed systematized symbols from their drawings.
These symbols represented words and sentences but were easier and faster to draw and
universally recognized for meaning. The discovery of clay made portable records possible
(you can’t carry a cave wall around with you). Early merchants used clay tokens with
pictographs to record the quantities of materials traded or shipped. These tokens date back
to about 8,500 B.C. With the high volume and the repetition inherent in record keeping,
pictographs evolved and slowly lost their picture detail. They became abstract figures
representing sounds in spoken communication. The alphabet replaced pictographs
between 1700 and 1500 B.C. in the Sinaitic world. The current Hebrew alphabet and
writing became popular around 600 B.C. About 400 B.C. the Greek alphabet was
developed. Greek was the first script written from left to right. From Greek followed the
Byzantine and the Roman (later Latin) writings. In the beginning, all writing systems had
only uppercase letters, when the writing instruments were refined enough for detailed
faces, lowercase was used as well (around 600 A.D.)

{B} The earliest means of writing that approached pen and paper as we know them today
was developed by the Greeks. They employed a writing stylus, made of metal, bone, or
ivory, to placemarks upon wax-coated tablets. The tablets are made in hinged pairs, closed
to protect the scribe’s notes. The first examples of handwriting (purely text messages made
by hand) originated in Greece. The Grecian scholar, Cadmus invented the written letter –
text messages on paper sent from one individual to another.


{C} Writing was advancing beyond chiselling pictures into stone or wedging pictographs
into wet clay. The Chinese invented and perfected ‘Indian Ink’. Originally designed for
blacking the surfaces of raised stone-carved hieroglyphics, the ink was a mixture of soot
from pine smoke and lamp oil mixed with the gelatin of donkey skin and musk. The ink
invented by the Chinese philosopher, Tien-Lcheu (2697 B.C.), became common by the
year 1200 B.C. Other cultures developed inks using natural dyes and colours derived from
berries, plants, and minerals. In early writings, different coloured inks had ritual meanings
attached to each colour.

{D} The invention of inks paralleled the introduction of the paper. The early Egyptians,
Romans, Greeks, and Hebrews, used papyrus and parchment papers. One of the oldest
pieces of writing on papyrus known to us today is the Egyptian “Prisse Papyrus” which
dates back to 2000 B.C. The Romans created a reed-pen perfect for parchment and ink,
from the hollow tubular stems of marsh grasses, especially from the jointed bamboo plant.
They converted bamboo stems into a primitive form of a fountain pen. They cut one end
into the form of a pen nib or point. A writing fluid or ink filled the stem, squeezing the reed
forced fluid to the nib

{E} By 400 A.D. a stable form of ink developed, a composite of iron salts, nutgalls, and
gum, the basic formula, which was to remain in use for centuries. Its colour when first
applied to paper was a bluish-black, rapidly turning into a darker black and then over the
years fading to the familiar dull brown colour commonly seen in old documents. Wood-fiber
paper was invented in China in 105 A.D. but it only became known about (due to Chinese
secrecy) in Japan around 700 A.D. and was brought to Spain by the Arabs in 711 A.D.
Paper was not widely used throughout Europe until paper mills were built in the late 14th
century


{F} The writing instrument that dominated for the longest period in history (over one
thousand years) was the quill pen. Introduced around 700 A.D., the quill is a pen made
from a bird feather. The strongest quills were those taken from living birds in the spring
from the five outer left wing feathers. The left wing was favoured because the feathers
curved outward and away when used by a right-handed writer. Goose feathers were most
common; swan feathers were of a premium grade being scarcer and more expensive. For
making fine lines, crow feathers were the best, and then came the feathers of the eagle,
owl, hawk, and turkey.

{G} There were also disadvantages associated with the use of quill pens, including a
lengthy preparation time. The early European writing parchments made from animal skins
required much scraping and cleaning. A lead and a ruler made margins. To sharpen the
quill, the writer needed a special knife (origins of the term “pen-knife”.) Beneath the writer’s
high-top desk was a coal stove, used to dry the ink as fast as possible.

H Plant-fiber paper became the primary medium for writing after another dramatic invention
took place: Johannes Gutenberg invented the printing press with replaceable wooden or
metal letters in 1436. Simpler kinds of printing e.g. stamps with names used much earlier in

China, did not find their way to Europe. During the centuries, many newer printing
technologies were developed based on Gutenberg’s printing machine e.g. offset printing.


{I} Articles written by hand had resembled printed letters until scholars began to change the
form of writing, using capitals and small letters, writing with more of a slant and connecting
letters. Gradually writing became more suitable to the speed the new writing instruments
permitted. The credit of inventing Italian ‘running hand’ or cursive handwriting with its
Roman capitals and small letters, goes to Aldus Manutius of Venice, who departed from the
old set forms in 1495 A.D. By the end of the 16th century, the old Roman capitals and
Greek letterforms transformed into the twenty-six alphabet letters we know today, both for
upper and lower-case letters. When writers had both better inks and paper, and
handwriting had developed into both an art form and an everyday occurrence, man’s
inventive nature once again turned to improving the writing instrument, leading to the
development of the modern fountain pens

Questions 1-2

What two features do record retention possess in nature?

A Easier and faster

B Capaciousness

C portable

D convenient
E Iterance


Question 3

What hurts the technique of producing wooden paper from popularity for a long time?

A Scarcity
B Complexity

C Confidentiality by the inventors

D High cost


Questions 4-10

The reading Passage has eleven paragraphs A-I.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter A-I, in boxes 4-10 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.

4..................... the working principle of the primitive pens made of plant stems

5..................... a writing tool commonly implemented for the longest time

6..................... liquid for writing firstly devised by Chinese
7..................... majuscule scripts as the unique written form originally

8..................... the original invention of today’s correspondences

9..................... the mention of two basic writing instruments being invented coordinately

10..................... a design to safeguard the written content


Questions 11-13

Answer the s below.
Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER from the passage for
each answer.

11 What makes it not so convenient to use the quill pens? 11.....................

12 When did one more breakthrough occur following the popularity of paper of plant fibres?
12.....................

13 What inventions were the results of human’s creative instinct of developing writing
tools? 13.....................

Solution:

1. B 8. B
2. E 9. D

3. C 10. B
11. LENGTHY PREPARATION
4. D
TIME
5. F 12. IN 1436

6. C 13. MODERN FOUNTAIN PENS
7. A
