TITLE: Tourism
INDEX: 581
============================================================

Tourism

A
Tourism, holidaymaking and travel are these days more significant social phenomena than most
commentators have considered. On the face of it there could not be a more trivial subject for a book. And
indeed since social scientists have had considerable difficulty explaining weightier topics, such as work or
politics, it might be thought that they would have great difficulties in accounting for more trivial phenomena
such as holidaymaking. However, there are interesting parallels with the study of deviance. This involves the
investigation of bizarre and idiosyncratic social practices which happen to be defined as deviant in some
societies but not necessarily in others. The assumption is that the investigation of deviance can reveal
interesting and significant aspects of normal societies. It could be said that a similar analysis can be applied to
tourism.

B
Tourism is a leisure activity which presupposes its opposite, namely regulated and organised work. It is one
manifestation of how work and leisure are organised as separate and regulated spheres of social practice in
modern societies. Indeed acting as a tourist is one of the defining characteristics of being ‘modern’ and the
popular concept of tourism is that it is organised within particular places and occurs for regularised periods of
time. Tourist relationships arise from a movement of people to, and their stay in, various destinations. This
necessarily involves some movement, that is the journey, and a period of stay in a new place or places. ‘The
journey and the stay’ are by definition outside the normal places of residence and work and are of a short term
and temporary nature and there is a clear intention to return ‘home’ within a relatively short period of time.

C
A substantial proportion of the population of modern societies engages in such tourist practices new socialised
forms of provision have developed in order to cope with the mass character of the gazes of tourists as
opposed to the individual character of travel. Places are chosen to be visited and be gazed upon because
there is an anticipation especially through daydreaming and fantasy of intense pleasures, either on a different
scale or involving different senses from those customarily encountered. Such anticipation is constructed and
sustained through a variety of non-tourist practices such as films, TV literature, magazines records and videos
which construct and reinforce this daydreaming.

D
Tourists tend to visit features of landscape and townscape which separate them off from everyday experience.
Such aspects are viewed because they are taken to be in some sense out of the ordinary. The viewing of
these tourist sights often involves different forms of social patterning with a much greater sensitivity to visual
elements of landscape or townscape than is normally found in everyday life. People linger over these sights in
a way that they would not normally do in their home environment and the vision is objectified or captured
through photographs postcards films and so on which enable the memory to be endlessly reproduced and
recaptured.
E

One of the earliest dissertations on the subject of tourism is Boorstins analysis of the pseudo event (1964)
where he argues that contemporary. Americans cannot experience reality directly but thrive on pseudo events.
Isolated from the host environment and the local people the mass tourist travels in guided groups and finds
pleasure in inauthentic contrived attractions gullibly enjoying the pseudo events and disregarding the real
world outside. Over time the images generated of different tourist sights come to constitute a closed self-
perpetuating system of illusions which provide the tourist with the basis for selecting and evaluating potential
places to visit. Such visits are made says Boorstin, within the environmental bubble of the familiar American
style hotel which insulates the tourist from the strangeness of the host environment.
F

To service the burgeoning tourist industry, an array of professionals has developed who attempt to reproduce
ever-new objects for the tourist to look at. These objects or places are located in a complex and changing
hierarchy. This depends upon the interplay between, on the one hand, competition between interests involved
in the provision of such objects and, on the other hand changing class, gender, and generational distinctions
of taste within the potential population of visitors. It has been said that to be a tourist is one of the
characteristics of the modern experience. Not to go away is like not possessing a car or a nice house. Travel
is a marker of status in modern societies and is also thought to be necessary for good health. The role of the
professional, therefore, is to cater for the needs and tastes of the tourists in accordance with their class and
overall expectations.

Questions 1-5

Reading Passage has 6 paragraphs (A-F).

Choose the most suitable heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.

Write the appropriate numbers (i-ix) in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet Paragraph D has
been done for you as an example.

NB There are more headings than paragraphs so you will not use all of them.

You may use any heading more than once.
List of Headings
i. The politics of tourism
1..................... Paragraph A
ii. The cost of tourism
2..................... Paragraph B
iii. Justifying the study of tourism
3..................... Paragraph C
iv. Tourism contrasted with travel
Example
v. The essence of modern tourism
Paragraph D Answer: ix
vi. Tourism versus leisure
4..................... Paragraph E
vii. The artificiality of modern tourism
5..................... Paragraph F
viii. The role of modern tour guides
ix. Creating an alternative to the everyday experience


Questions 6-10

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage? In
boxes 6-10 write
YES if the statement agrees with the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this


Example

People who can’t afford to travel watch films and TV. Answer: NOT GIVEN


6..................... Tourism is a trivial subject.
7..................... An analysis of deviance can act as a model for the analysis of tourism.

8..................... Tourists usually choose to travel overseas.
9..................... Tourists focus more on places they visit than those at home.

10..................... Tour operators try to cheat tourists.


Questions 11-14

Chose one phrase (A-H) from the list of phrases to complete each key point below. Write
the appropriate letters (A-H) in boxes 11-14 on your answer sheet.

The information in the completed sentences should be an accurate summary of points
made by the writer.

NB There are more phrases A-H than sentences so you will not use them all. You
may use any phrase more than once.


11 Our concept of tourism arises from 11.....................

12 The media can be used to enhance 12.....................

13 People view tourist landscapes in a different way from 13.....................

14 Group tours encourage participants to look at 14.....................


List of Phrases
local
people the
and their individual
environme character

A nt. E of travel.

the places
expectatio seen in
ns of everyday
B tourists. F life.

photogra
the
phs
phenomen
which
C a of G
recapture
holiday
our holida
making.
ys.
the sights
D distinction H designed
we make specially
between w
for
ork and
tourists.
leisure.

Solution:

1. iii 8. NOT GIVEN
2. v 9. YES

3. iv 10. NOT GIVEN
4. vii 11. D

5. viii 12. B
6. NO 13. F

7. YES 14. H
