TITLE: Travel Accounts
INDEX: 586
============================================================

Travel Accounts

A

There are many reasons why individuals have traveled beyond their own societies. Some
travelers may have simply desired to satisfy curiosity about the larger world. Until recent
times, however, trade, business dealings, diplomacy, political administration, military
campaigns, exile, flight from persecution, migration, pilgrimage, missionary efforts, and the
quest for economic or educational opportunities were more common inducements for
foreign travel than was a mere curiosity. While the travelers’ accounts give much valuable
information on these foreign lands and provide a window for the understanding of the local
cultures and histories, they are also a mirror to the travelers themselves, for these accounts
help them to have a better understanding of themselves.

B
Records of foreign travel appeared soon after the invention of writing, and fragmentary
travel accounts appeared in both Mesopotamia and Egypt in ancient times. After the
formation of large, imperial states in the classical world, travel accounts emerged as a
prominent literary genre in many lands, and they held especially strong appeal for rulers
desiring useful knowledge about their realms. The Greek historian Herodotus reported on
his travels in Egypt and Anatolia in researching the history of the Persian wars. The
Chinese envoy Zhang Qian described much of central Asia as far west as Bactria (modern-
day Afghanistan) on the basis of travels undertaken in the first century BC while searching
for allies for the Han dynasty. Hellenistic and Roman geographers such as Ptolemy,
Strabo, and Pliny the Elder relied on their own travels through much of the Mediterranean
world as well as reports of other travelers to compile vast compendia of geographical
knowledge.
C

During the postclassical era (about 500 to 1500 CE), trade and pilgrimage emerged as
major incentives for travel to foreign lands. Muslim merchants sought trading opportunities
throughout much of the eastern hemisphere. They described lands, peoples, and
commercial products of the Indian Ocean basin from East Africa to Indonesia, and they
supplied the first written accounts of societies in sub-Saharan west Africa. While merchants
set out in search of trade and profit, devout Muslims traveled as pilgrims to Mecca to make
their hajj and visit the holy sites of Islam. Since the prophet Muhammad’s original
pilgrimage to Mecca, untold millions of Muslims have followed his example, and thousands
of hajj accounts have related their experiences. One of the best known Muslim travelers,
Ibn Battuta, began his travels with the hajj but then went on to visit central Asia, India,
China, sub-Saharan Africa, and parts of Mediterranean Europe before returning finally to
his home in Morocco. East Asian travelers were not quite so prominent as Muslims during
the postclassical era, but they too followed many of the highways and sea lanes of the
eastern hemisphere. Chinese merchants frequently visited Southeast Asia and India,
occasionally venturing even to east Africa, and devout East Asian Buddhists undertook
distant pilgrimages. Between the 5th and 9th centuries CE, hundreds and possibly even
thousands of Chinese Buddhists traveled to India to study with Buddhist teachers, collect
sacred texts, and visit holy sites. Written accounts recorded the experiences of many
pilgrims, such as Faxian, Xuanzang, and Yijing. Though not so numerous as the Chinese
pilgrims, Buddhists from Japan, Korea, and other lands also ventured abroad in the
interests of spiritual enlightenment.

D

Medieval Europeans did not hit the roads in such large numbers as their Muslim and east
Asian counterparts during the early part of the postclassical era, although gradually
increasing crowds of Christian pilgrims flowed to Jerusalem, Rome, Santiago de
Compostela (in northern Spain), and other sites. After the 12th century, however,
merchants, pilgrims, and missionaries from medieval Europe traveled widely and left
numerous travel accounts, of which Marco Polo’s description of his travels and sojourn in

China is the best known. As they became familiar with the larger world of the eastern
hemisphere – and the profitable commercial opportunities that it offered – European
peoples worked to find new and more direct routes to Asian and African markets. Their
efforts took them not only to all parts of the eastern hemisphere but eventually to the
Americas and Oceania as well.

E

If Muslim and Chinese peoples dominated travel writing in postclassical times, European
explorers, conquerors, merchants, and missionaries took center stage during the early
modern era (about 1500 to 1800 CE). By no means did Muslim and Chinese travel come to
a halt in early modern times. But European peoples ventured to the distant corners of the
globe, and European printing presses churned out thousands of travel accounts that
described foreign lands and peoples for a reading public with an apparently insatiable
appetite for news about the larger world. The volume of travel literature was so great that
several editors, including Giambattista Ramusio, Richard Hakluyt, Theodore de Bry, and

Samuel Purchas, assembled numerous travel accounts and made them available in
enormous published collections.

F
During the 19th century, European travelers made their way to the interior regions of Africa
and the Americas, generating a fresh round of travel writing as they did so. Meanwhile,
European colonial administrators devoted numerous writing to the societies of their colonial
subjects, particularly in Asian and African colonies they established. By midcentury,
attention was flowing also in the other direction. Painfully aware of the military and
technological prowess of European and Euro-American societies, Asian travelers, in
particular, visited Europe and the United States in hopes of discovering principles useful for
the reorganization of their own societies. Among the most prominent of these travelers who
made extensive use of their overseas observations and experiences in their own writing
were the Japanese reformer Fukuzawa Yukichi and the Chinese revolutionary Sun Yat-
sen.

G

With the development of inexpensive and reliable means of mass transport, the 20th
century witnessed explosions both in the frequency of long-distance travel and in the
volume of travel writing. While a great deal of travel took place for reasons of business,
administration, diplomacy, pilgrimage, and missionary work, as in ages past, increasingly
effective modes of mass transport made it possible for new kinds of travel to flourish. The
most distinctive of them was mass tourism, which emerged as a major form of consumption
for individuals living in the world’s wealthy societies. Tourism enabled consumers to get
away from home to see the sights in Rome, take a cruise through the Caribbean, walk the
Great Wall of China, visit some wineries in Bordeaux, or go on safari in Kenya. A peculiar
variant of the travel account arose to meet the needs of these tourists: the guidebook,
which offered advice on food, lodging, shopping, local customs, and all the sights that
visitors should not miss seeing. Tourism has had a massive economic impact throughout
the world, but other new forms of travel have also had considerable influence in
contemporary times. Recent times have seen unprecedented waves of migration, for
example, and numerous migrants have sought to record their experiences and articulate
their feelings about life in foreign lands. Recent times have also seen an unprecedented
development of ethnic consciousness, and many are the intellectuals and writers in the
diaspora who have visited the homes of their ancestors to see how much of their forebears’
values and cultural traditions they themselves have inherited. Particularly notable among
their accounts are the memoirs of Malcolm X and Maya Angelou describing their visits to

Africa.

Questions 1-8

Complete the table below.

Write NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from Reading Passage for each answer.

Write your answer in boxes 1-8 on your answer sheet.
TIME DESTINATION TRAVELER PURPOSE

To obtain
Classical era Egypt and Anatolia Herodotus information
on 1......................
To
1st century BC Central Asia Zhang Qian seek 2.....................
.
To
Ptolemy, Strabo
Roman Empire Mediterranean gather 3...................
Pliny the Elder
..
Eastern For business
Post-classical era Muslims
Hemisphere and 4.....................
To study
5th to 9th with 5.....................
India Asian Buddhists
centuries CE and for spiritual
enlightenment
To meet the public’s
Distant places of
Early modern era The Europeans expectation for the
the globe
outside
To provide
Colonial information on
19th century Asia, Africa
administrator the 6.....................
they conquer
To
By the mid- learn 7.....................
Europe and the Sun Yat-sen,
century of the for the
United States Fukuzawa Yukichi
1800s reorganization of
their societies
People
20th century Mass tourism from 8................... For entertainment
.. countries

Questions 9-13
Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.
Write your answers in boxes 9-13 on your answer sheet.
9. Why did some people travel in the early days?
A to do research on themselves

B to write travel books
C to have a better understanding of other people and places

D to study local culture


10. The travelers’ accounts are a mirror to themselves,

A because they help them to be aware of local histories.
B because travelers are curious about the world.

C because travelers could do more research on the unknown.

D because they reflect the writers’ own experience and social life.


11. Most of the people who went to holy sites during the early part of the postclassical era
are

A Europeans.

B Muslim and East Asians.

C Americans.

D Greeks.


12. During the early modern era, a large number of travel books were published to

A provide what the public wants.

B encourage the public’s feedback.

C gain profit.

D prompt trips to the new world.


13. What stimulated the market for traveling in the 20th century?
A the wealthy

B travel books

C delicious food

D mass transport

Solution:

1. Persian wars 8. wealthy
2. allies 9. C

3. geographical
10. D
knowledge
4. pilgrimage 11. B
5. Buddhist teachers 12. A

6. colonies 13. D
7. principles
