TITLE: TV Addiction 2
INDEX: 590
============================================================

TV Addiction 2

A. Excessive cravings do not necessarily involve physical substances. Gambling can
become compulsive; sex can become obsessive. One activity, however, stands out for its
prominence and ubiquity—the world’s most popular pastime, television. Most people admit
to having a love-bate relationship with it. They complain about the “boob tube” and “couch
potatoes,” then they settle into their sofas and grab the remote control. Parents commonly
fret about their children’s viewing (if not their own). Even researchers who study TV for a
living marvel at the medium’s hold on them personally. Percy Tannenbaum of the
University of California at Berkeley has written: “Among life’s more embarrassing moments
have been countless occasions when I am engaged in conversation in a room while a TV
set is on, and I cannot for the life of me stop from periodically glancing over to the screen.
This occurs not only during dull conversations but during reasonably interesting ones just
as well.”

B. Scientists have been studying the effects of television for decades, generally focusing
on whether watching violence on TV correlates with being violent in real life. Less attention
has been paid to the basic allure of the small screen—the medium, as opposed to the
message.


C. The term “TV addiction” is imprecise and laden with value judgments, but it captures the
essence of a very real phenomenon. Psychologists and psychiatrists formally define
substance dependence as a disorder characterized by criteria that include spending a great
deal of time using the substance; using it more often than one intends; thinking about
reducing use or making repeated unsuccessful efforts to reduce use; giving up important
social, family or occupational activities to use it; and reporting withdrawal symptoms when
one stops using it.

D. All these criteria can apply to people who watch a lot of television. That does not mean
that watching television, in itself, is problematic. Television can teach and amuse; it can
reach aesthetic heights; it can provide much needed distraction and escape. The difficulty
arises when people strongly sense that they ought not to watch as much as they do and yet
find themselves strangely unable to reduce their viewing. Some knowledge of how the
medium exerts its pull may help heavy viewers gain better control over their lives.
E. The amount of time people spend watching television is astonishing. On average,
individuals in the industrialized world devote three hours a day to the pursuit—fully half of
their leisure time, and more than on any single activity save work and sleep. At this rate,
someone who lives to 75 would spend nine years in front of the tube. To some
commentators, this devotion means simply that people enjoy TV and make a conscious
decision to watch it. But if that is the whole story, why do so many people experience
misgivings about how much they view? In Gallup polls in 1992 and 1999, two out of five
adult respondents and seven out of 10 teenagers said they spent too much time watching
TV. Other surveys have consistently shown that roughly 10 percent of adults call
themselves TV addicts.

F. What is it about TV that has such a hold on US? In part, the attraction seems to spring
from our biological ‘orienting response.’ First described by Ivan Pavlov in 1927, the
orienting response is our instinctive visual or auditory reaction to any sudden or novel
stimulus. It is part of our evolutionary heritage, a built- in sensitivity to movement and
potential predatory threats.


G. In 1986 Byron Reeves of Stanford University, Esther Thorson of the University of

Missouri and their colleagues began to study whether the simple formal features of
television-cuts, edits, zooms, pans, sudden noises—activate the orienting response,
thereby keeping attention on the screen. By watching how brain waves were affected by
formal features, the researchers concluded that these stylistic tricks can indeed trigger
involuntary responses and ‘derive their attention-al value through the evolutionary
significance of detecting movement…. It is the form, not the content, of television that is
unique.’

H. The orienting response may partly explain common viewer remarks such as: “If a
television is on, I just can’t keep my eyes off it,” “I don’t want to watch as much as I do, but I
can’t help it,” and “I feel hypnotized when I watch television.” In the years since Reeves and
Thorson published then pioneering work, researchers have delved deeper. Annie Lang’s
research team at Indiana University has shown that heart rate decreases for four to six
seconds after an orienting stimulus. In ads, action sequences and music videos, formal
features frequently come at a rate of one per second, thus activating the orienting response
continuously.


I. Lang and her colleagues have also investigated whether formal features affect people’s
memory of what they have seen. In one of their studies, participants watched a program
and then filled out a score sheet. Increasing the frequency of edits (defined here as a
change from one camera angle to another in the same visual scene) improved memory
recognition, presumably because it focused attention on the screen. Increasing the
frequency of cuts—changes to a new visual scene-had a similar effect but only up to a
point. If the number of cuts exceeded 10 in two minutes, recognition dropped off sharply.
J. Producers of educational television for children have found that formal features can help
learning. But increasing the rate of cuts and edits eventually overloads the brain. Music
videos and commercials that use rapid intercutting of unrelated scenes are designed to
hold attention more than they are to convey information. People may remember the name
of the product or band, but the details of the ad itself float in one ear and out the other. The
orienting response is overworked. Viewers still attend to the screen, but they feel tired and
worn out, with little compensating psychological reward. Our ESM findings show much the
same thing.


K. Sometimes the memory of the product is very subtle. Many ads today are deliberately
oblique: they have an engaging story line, but it is hard to tell what they are trying to sell.
Afterward you may not remember the product consciously. Yet advertisers believe that if
they have gotten your attention, when you later go to the store you will feel better or more
comfortable with a given product because you have a vague recollection of having heard of
it.

Questions 27-30

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage?

In boxes 27-30 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement is true
NO if the statement is false
NOT GIVEN if the formation is not given to the passage

27..................... Even researcher find sometimes it is more interesting in watching TV than
talking with others in personal experience

28..................... Information medium as TV has always been the priority for scientific
research.

29..................... It is partially unscientific to use the term ‘TV addiction’.

30...................... Children do not know why they exercise too little.


Questions 31-33

Choose THREE letters, A-F.

Write the correct letters in boxes 31-33 on your answer sheet.

Which THREE of the following are benefits of watching TV?

A artistic inspiration
B family reunion

C relieve stress

D learn knowledge and education

E work efficiency

F ease communicative conflict


Questions 34-37

Look at the following researchers (Questions 34-37) and the list of statements below.
Match each researcher with the correct statements.

Write the correct letter A-G in boxes 34-37 on your answer sheets.

34..................... Percy Tannenbaum

35..................... Ivan Pavlov

36..................... Byron Reeves and Esther Thorson

37..................... Annie Lang
List of Statements

A. It is the specific media formal characteristic that counts.

B. TV distraction shows human physical reaction to a new and prompted stimulus

C. Conveying information is the most important thing.

D. It is hard to ignore the effects of TV.
E. Whether people can remember deeper of the content relates with the format.

F. The heart rate remains stable when watching.

G. Clinically reliance on TV does not meet the criteria of an addiction.


Questions 38-40

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage 3, using NO
MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 38-40 on your answer sheet

TV is becoming a worldwide 38...................... Some people love it and spend a great deal
of time watching it. According to some surveys, a small group even claim themselves
as 39..................... One researcher believes that this attraction comes from our human
instinct, described as 40..................... which is built in part of our physiological evolution.

Solution:

1. YES 8. D
2. NO 9. B

3. YES 10. A
4. NOT GIVEN 11. E

5. A 12. popular pastime
6. C 13. TV addicts

7. D 14. orienting response
