TITLE: Twin Study: Two of a kind
INDEX: 591
============================================================

Twin Study: Two of a kind

A

THE scientific study of twins goes back to the late 19th century, when Francis Galton, an
early geneticist, realised that they came in two varieties: identical twins born from one egg
and non-identical twins that had come from two. That insight turned out to be key, although
it was not until 1924 that it was used to formulate what is known as the twin rule of
pathology, and twin studies really got going.

B

The twin rule of pathology states that any heritable disease will be more concordant (that
is, more likely to be jointly present or absent) in identical twins than in non-identical twins –
and, in turn, will be more concordant in non-identical twins than in non-siblings. Early work,
for example, showed that the statistical correlation of skin-mole counts between identical
twins was 0.4, while non-identical twins had a correlation of only 0.2. (A score of 1.0 implies
a perfect correlation, while a score of zero implies no correlation.) This result suggests that
moles are heritable, but it also implies that there is an environmental component to the
development of moles, otherwise, the correlation in identical twins would be close to 1.0.

C
Twin research has shown that whether or not someone takes up smoking is determined
mainly by environmental factors, but once he does so, how much he smokes is largely
down to his genes. And while a person’s religion is clearly a cultural attribute, there is a
strong genetic component to religious fundamentalism. Twin studies are also unraveling
the heritability of various aspects of human personality. Traits from neuroticism and anxiety
to thrill – and novelty-seeking all have large genetic components. Parenting matters, but it
does not determine personality in the way that some had thought.

D

More importantly, perhaps, twin studies are helping the understanding of diseases such as
cancer, asthma, osteoporosis, arthritis and immune disorders. And twins can be used,
within ethical, for medical experiments. A study that administered vitamin C to one twin and
a placebo to the other found that it had no effect on the common cold. The lesson from all
of today’s twin studies is that most human traits are at least partially influenced by genes.
However, for the most part, the age-old dichotomy between nature and nurture is not very
useful. Many genetic programs are open to input from the environment, and genes are
frequently switched on or off by environmental signals. It is also possible that genes
themselves influence their environment. Some humans have an innate preference for
participation in sports. Others are drawn to novelty. Might people also be drawn to certain
kinds of friends and types of experience? In this way, a person’s genes might shape the
environment they act in as much as the environment shapes the actions of the genes.

E

In the past, such research has been controversial. Josef Mengele, a Nazi doctor working at
the Auschwitz extermination camp during the second world war, was fascinated by twins.
He sought them out among arrivals at the camp and preserved them from the gas-
chambers for a series of brutal experiments. After the war, Cyril Burt, a British psychologist
who worked on the heredity of intelligence, tainted twin research with results that appear, in
retrospect, to have been rather too good. Some of his data on identical twins who had been
reared apart were probably faked. In any case, the prevailing ideology in the social
sciences after the war was Marxist and disliked suggestions that differences in human
potential might have underlying genetic causes. Twin studies were thus viewed with
suspicion.

F
The ideological pendulum has swung back; however, as the human genome project and its
aftermath have turned genes for abstract concepts to real pieces of DNA. The role of genes
in sensitive areas such as intelligence is acknowledged by all but a few die-hards. The
interesting questions now concern how nature and nurture interact to produce particular
bits of biology, rather than which of the two is more important. Twin studies, which are a
good way to ask these questions, are back in fashion, and many twins are enthusiastic
participants in this research.

G

Research at the Twinsburg festival began in a small way, with a single stand in 1979.
Gradually, news spread and more scientists began turning up. This year, half a dozen
groups of researchers were lodged in a specially pitched research tent. In one corner of
this tent, Paul Breslin, who works at the Monell Institute in Philadelphia, watched over
several tables where twins sat sipping clear liquids from cups and making notes. It was the
team’s third year at Twinsburg. Dr Breslin and his colleagues want to find out how genes
influence human perception, particularly the senses of smell and taste and those (warmth,
cold, pain, tingle, itch and so on) that result from stimulation of the skin. Perception is an
example of something that is probably influenced by both genes and experience. Even
before birth, people are exposed to flavours such as chocolate, garlic, mint and vanilla that
pass intact into the bloodstream, and thus to the fetus. Though it is not yet clear whether
such pre-natal exposure shapes taste-perception, there is evidence that it shapes
preferences for foods encountered later in life.

H

However, there are clearly genetic influences at work, as well – for example in the ability to
taste quinine. Some people experience this as intensely bitter, even when it is present at
very low levels. Others, whose genetic endowment is different, are less bothered by it. Twin
studies make this extremely clear. Within a pair of identical twins, either both, or neither,
will find quinine hard to swallow. Non-identical twins will agree less frequently.

I

On the other side of the tent Dennis Drayna, from the National Institute on Deafness and
Other Communication Disorders, in Maryland, was studying hearing. He wants to know
what happens to sounds after they reach the ear. It is not clear, he says, whether the
sound is processed into sensation mostly in the ear or in the brain. Dr Drayna has already
been involved in a twin study which revealed that the perception of musical pitch is highly
heritable. At Twinsburg, he is playing different words, or parts of words, into the left and
right ears of his twinned volunteers. The composite of the two sounds that an individual
reports hearing depends on how he processes this diverse information and that, Dr Drayna
believes, may well be influenced by genetics.

J

Elsewhere in the marquee, Peter Miraldi, of Kent State University in Ohio, was trying to find
out whether genes affect an individual’s motivation to communicate with others. A number
of twin studies have shown that personality and sociability are heritable, so he thinks this is
fertile ground. And next to Mr Miraldi was a team of dermatologists from Case Western
Reserve University in Cleveland. They are looking at the development of skin disease and
male-pattern baldness. The goal of the latter piece of research is to find the genes
responsible for making men’s hair fall out.

K

The busiest part of the tent, however, was the queue for forensic-science research into
fingerprints. The origins of this study are shrouded in mystery. For many months, the
festival’s organisers have been convinced that the Secret Service – the American
government agency responsible for, among other things, the safety of the president – is
behind it. When The Economist contacted the Secret Service for more information, we
were referred to Steve Nash, who is chairman of the International Association for
Identification (IAI) and is also a detective in the scientific investigations section of the Marin
Country Sheriff’s Office in California. The IAI, based in Minnesota, is an organisation of
forensic scientists from around the world. Among other things, it publishes the Journal of
Forensic Identification.

Questions 1-5

The Reading Passage has seven paragraphs A-K

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter A-K, in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.

NB You may use any letter more than once.


1..................... Mentioned research conducted in Ohio

2..................... Medical contribution to the researches for twins.

3..................... Research situation under life-threatening conditions

4..................... Data of similarities of identical twins

5..................... Reasons that make one study unconvincing


Questions 6-7

Complete the following summary of the paragraphs of Reading Passage

Using NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the Reading Passage for each answer.


Write your answers in boxes 6-7 on your answer sheet.


The first one that conducted research on twins is called 6...................... He separated twins
into two categories: non-identical and identical twins. The twin research was used in a
medical application in as early as the year of 7......................


Questions 8-10

Choose the correct letters in the following options:

Write your answers in boxes 8-10 on your answer sheet.

Please choose THREE research fields that had been carried out in Ohio, Maryland and
Twinburgh?

A Sense

B Cancer

C Be allergic to Vitamin D

D Mole heredity
E Sound

F Boldness of men


Questions 11-13

Choose the correct letters in the following options

Write your answers in boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet.

Please choose THREE results that had been verified in this passage.

A Non-identical twins come from different eggs.

B Genetic relation between identical twins is closer than non-identical ones.
C Vitamin C has an evident effect on a cold.

D Genetic influence on smoking is superior to the environment’s

E If a pregnant woman eats too much sweet would lead to skin disease.

F Hair loss has been found to be connected with a skin problem.

Solution:

1. J 8. A
2. D 9. E

3. E 10. F
4. B 11. A

5. E 12. B
6. Francis Galton 13. D

7. 1924
