TITLE: UK companies need more effective boards of directors
INDEX: 593
============================================================

UK companies need more effective boards of directors

A After a number of serious failures of governance (that is, how they are managed at the
highest level), companies in Britain, as well as elsewhere, should consider radical changes
to their directors’ roles. It is clear that the role of a board director today is not an easy one.
Following the 2008 financial meltdown, which resulted in a deeper and more prolonged
period of economic downturn than anyone expected, the search for explanations in the
many post-mortems of the crisis has meant blame has been spread far and wide.

Governments, regulators, central banks and auditors have all been in the frame. The role of
bank directors and management and their widely publicised failures have been extensively
picked over and examined in reports, inquiries and commentaries.

B The knock-on t of this scrutiny has been to make the governance of companies in
general an issue of intense public debate and has significantly increased the pressures on,
and the responsibilities of, directors. At the simplest and most practical level, the time
involved in fulfilling the demands of a board directorship has increased significantly, calling
into question the effectiveness of the classic model of corporate governance by part-time,
independent non-executive directors. Where once a board schedule may have consisted of
between eight and ten meetings a year, in many companies the number of events requiring
board input and decisions has dramatically risen. Furthermore, the amount of reading and
preparation required for each meeting is increasing. Agendas can become overloaded and
this can mean the time for constructive debate must necessarily be restricted in favour of
getting through the business.

C Often, board business is devolved to committees in order to cope with the workload,
which may be more efficient but can mean that the board as a whole is less involved in fully
addressing some of the most important issues. It is not uncommon for the audit committee
meeting to last longer than the main board meeting itself. Process may take the place of
discussion and be at the expense of real collaboration, so that boxes are ticked rather than
issues tackled. D A radical solution, which may work for some very large companies whose
businesses are extensive and complex, is the professional board, whose members would
work up to three or four days a week, supported by their own dedicated staff and advisers.
There are obvious risks to this and it would be important to establish clear guidelines for
such a board to ensure that it did not step on the toes of management by becoming too
engaged in the day-to-day running of the company. Problems of recruitment, remuneration
and independence could also arise and this structure would not be appropriate for all
companies. However, more professional and better-informed boards would have been
particularly appropriate for banks where the executives had access to information that part-
time non-executive directors lacked, leaving the latter unable to comprehend or anticipate
the 2008 crash.

E One of the main criticisms of boards and their directors is that they do not focus
sufficiently on longer-term matters of strategy, sustainability and governance, but instead
concentrate too much on short-term financial metrics. Regulatory requirements and the
structure of the market encourage this behaviour. The tyranny of quarterly reporting can
distort board decision-making, as directors have to ‘make the numbers’ every four months
to meet the insatiable appetite of the market for more data. This serves to encourage the
trading methodology of a certain kind of investor who moves in and out of a stock without
engaging in constructive dialogue with the company about strategy or performance, and is
simply seeking a short¬ term financial gain. This effect has been made worse by the
changing profile of investors due to the globalisation of capital and the increasing use of
automated trading systems. Corporate culture adapts and management teams are largely
incentivised to meet financial goals.

F Compensation for chief executives has become a combat zone where pitched battles
between investors, management and board members are fought, often behind closed
doors but increasingly frequently in the full glare of press attention. Many would argue that
this is in the interest of transparency and good governance as shareholders use their
muscle in the area of pay to pressure boards to remove underperforming chief executives.
Their powers to vote down executive remuneration policies increased when binding votes
came into force. The chair of the remuneration committee can be an exposed and lonely
role, as Alison Carnwath, chair of Barclays Bank’s remuneration committee, found when
she had to resign, having been roundly criticised for trying to defend the enormous bonus
to be paid to the chief executive; the irony being that she was widely understood to have
spoken out against it in the privacy of the committee.

G The financial crisis stimulated a debate about the role and purpose of the company and a
heightened awareness of corporate ethics. Trust in the corporation has been eroded and
academics such as Michael Sandel, in his thoughtful and bestselling book What Money
Can’t Buy, are questioning the morality of capitalism and the market economy. Boards of
companies in all sectors will need to widen their perspective to encompass these issues
and this may involve a realignment of corporate goals. We live in challenging times.

Questions 1-7

Reading Passage has seven paragraphs, A-G.

Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-viii, in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet.

1..................... Paragraph A

2..................... Paragraph B
3..................... Paragraph C

4..................... Paragraph D

5..................... Paragraph E

6..................... Paragraph F

7..................... Paragraph G

List of Headings
i Disputes over financial arrangements regarding senior managers
ii The impact on companies of being subjected to close examination
iii The possible need for fundamental change in every area of business
iv
Many external bodies being held responsible for problems
v The falling number of board members with broad enough experience
vi A risk that not all directors take part in solving major problems
vii Boards not looking far enough ahead
viii A proposal to change the way the board operates


Question 8-11

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage?
In boxes 8-11 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

8..................... Close scrutiny of the behaviour of boards has increased since the
economic downturn.

9..................... Banks have been mismanaged to a greater extent than other businesses.
10..................... Board meetings normally continue for as long as necessary to debate
matters in full.

11..................... Using a committee structure would ensure that board members are fully
informed about significant issues.


Questions 12-14

Complete the sentences below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 12-14 on your answer sheet.

12 Before 2008, non-executive directors were at a disadvantage because of their lack of
12......................

13 Boards tend to place too much emphasis on 13..................... considerations that are
only of short-term relevance.

14 On certain matters, such as pay, the board may have to accept the views of
14......................

Solution:

1. iv 8. YES
2. ii 9. NOT GIVEN

3. vi 10. NO
4.
11. NO
viii
5. vii 12. information

6. i 13. financial
7. iii 14. shareholders/investors
