TITLE: Video game research
INDEX: 599
============================================================

Video game research

Although video games were first developed for adults, they are no longer exclusively
reserved for the grown ups in the home. In 2006, Rideout and Hamel reported that as many
as 29 percent of preschool children (children between two and six years old) in the United
States had played console video games, and 18 percent had played hand-held ones. Given
young children’s insatiable eagerness to learn, coupled with the fact that they are clearly
surrounded by these media, we predict that preschoolers will both continue and
increasingly begin to adopt video games for personal enjoyment. Although the majority of
gaming equipment is still designed for a much older target audience, once a game system
enters the household it is potentially available for all family members, including the
youngest. Portable systems have done a particularly good job of penetrating the younger
market.

Research in the video game market is typically done at two stages: some time close to the
end of the product cycle, in order to get feedback from consumers, so that a marketing
strategy can be developed; and at the very end of the product cycle to ‘fix bugs’ in the
game. While both of those types of research are important, and may be appropriate for
dealing with adult consumers, neither of them aids in designing better games, especially
when it comes to designing for an audience that may have particular needs, such as
preschoolers or senior citizens. Instead, exploratory and formative research has to be
undertaken in order to truly understand those audiences, their abilities, their perspective,
and their needs. In the spring of 2007, our preschool-game production team at Nickelodeon
had a hunch that the Nintendo DS - with its new features, such as the microphone, small
size and portability, and its relatively low price point - was a ripe gaming platform for
preschoolers. There were a few games on the market at the time which had characters that
appealed to the younger set, but our game producers did not think that the game
mechanics or design were appropriate for preschoolers. What exactly preschoolers could
do with the system, however, was a bit of a mystery. So we set about doing a study to
answer the query: What could we expect preschoolers to be capable of in the context of
hand-held game play, and how might the child development literature inform us as we
proceeded with the creation of a new outlet for this age group?

Our context in this case was the United States, although the games that resulted were also
released in other regions, due to the broad international reach of the characters. In order to
design the best possible DS product for a preschool audience we were fully committed to
the ideals of a ‘user-centered approach’, which assumes that users will be at least
considered, but ideally consulted during the development process. After all, when it comes
to introducing a new interactive product to the child market, and particularly such a young
age group within it, we believe it is crucial to assess the range of physical and cognitive
abilities associated with their specific developmental stage.

Revelle and Medoff (2002) review some of the basic reasons why home entertainment
systems, computers, and other electronic gaming devices, are often difficult for
preschoolers to use. In addition to their still developing motor skills (which make
manipulating a controller with small buttons difficult), many of the major stumbling blocks
are cognitive. Though preschoolers are learning to think symbolically, and understand that
pictures can stand for real-life objects, the vast majority are still unable to read and write.
Thus, using text-based menu selections is not viable. Mapping is yet another obstacle
since preschoolers may be unable to understand that there is a direct link between how the
controller is used and the activities that appear before them on screen. Though this aspect
is changing, in traditional mapping systems real life movements do not usually translate
into game-based activity.

Over the course of our study, we gained many insights into how preschoolers interact with
various platforms, including the DS. For instance, all instructions for preschoolers need to
be in voice-over, and include visual representations, and this has been one of the most
difficult areas for us to negotiate with respect to game design on the DS. Because the
game cartridges have very limited memory capacity, particularly in comparison to console
or computer games, the ability to capture large amounts of voice-over data via sound files
or visual representations of instructions becomes limited. Text instructions take up minimal
memory, so they are preferable from a technological perspective. Figuring out ways to
maximise sound and graphics files, while retaining the clear visual and verbal cues that we
know are critical for our youngest players, is a constant give and take. Another of our
findings indicated that preschoolers may use either a stylus, or their fingers, or both
although they are not very accurate with either. One of the very interesting aspects of the

DS is that the interface, which is designed to respond to stylus interactions, can also
effectively be used with the tip of the finger. This is particularly noteworthy in the context of
preschoolers for two reasons. Firstly, as they have trouble with fine motor skills and their
hand-eye coordination is still in development, they are less exact with their stylus
movements; and secondly, their fingers are so small that they mimic the stylus very
effectively, and therefore by using their fingers they can often be more accurate in their
game interactions.

Questions 1-5

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage 3?

Write

YES if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
1..................... Video game use amongst preschool children is higher in the US than in
other countries.
2..................... The proportion of preschool children using video games is likely to rise.

3..................... Parents in the US who own gaming equipment generally allow their
children to play with it.

4..................... The type of research which manufacturers usually do is aimed at improving
game design.

5..................... Both old and young games consumers require research which is
specifically targeted.


Questions 6-10

Complete the summary using the list of words/phrases, A-l, below.


Problems for preschool users of video games

Preschool children find many electronic games difficult, because neither their motor
skills nor their 6..................... are sufficiently developed.

Certain types of control are hard for these children to manipulate, for example,
7..................... can be more effective than styluses.

Also, although they already have the ability to relate 8..................... to real-world objects,
preschool children are largely unable to understand the connection between their own
9..................... and the movements they can see on the screen. Finally, very few
preschool children can understand 10......................


C
B cognit
A actions
buttons ive
skills

D F
E
concentrat pictur
fingers
ion es
I
H
writte
spoken
G sounds n
instructi
menu
ons
s

Questions 11-14

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D

11 In 2007, what conclusion did games producers at Nickelodeon come to?

A The preschool market was unlikely to be sufficiently profitable.

B One of their hardware products would probably be suitable for preschoolers.
C Games produced by rival companies were completely inappropriate for
preschoolers.
D They should put their ideas for new games for preschoolers into practice.

12 The study carried out by Nickelodeon

A was based on children living in various parts of the world.

B focused on the kinds of game content which interests preschoolers.

C investigated the specific characteristics of the target market.

D led to products which appealed mainly to the US consumers.

13 Which problem do the writers highlight concerning games instructions for young
children?

A Spoken instructions take up a lot of the available memory.
B Written instructions have to be expressed very simply.

C The children do not follow instructions consistently.

D The video images distract attention from the instructions.

14 Which is the best title for Reading Passage 3?

A An overview of video games software for the preschool market

B Researching and designing video games for preschool children

C The effects of video games on the behaviour of young children

D Assessing the impact of video games on educational achievement

Solution:

1. NOT GIVEN 8. F
2. YES 9. A

3. NOT GIVEN 10. I
4. NO 11. B

5. YES 12. C
6. C 13. A

7. E 14. B
