TITLE: Water Treatment 2: Reed Bed
INDEX: 608
============================================================

Water Treatment 2: Reed Bed

In recent years, it has been shown that plants, more accurately roots, play a crucial part in
purifying dirty water before it enters seas and rivers. In 15th-century Britain, dirty water was
purified by passing through the wetlands. People began to realize that the “natural” way of
water purification was effective. Nowadays subsurface flow wetlands (SSFW) are a
common alternative in Europe for the treatment of wastewater in rural areas, Mainly in the
last 10 to 12 years there has been a significant growth in the number and size of the
systems in use. The conventional mechanism of water
purification used in big cities where there are large volumes of water to be purified is
inappropriate in rural areas.


The common reed has the ability to transfer oxygen from its leaves, down through its stem
and rhizomes, and out via its root system. As a result of this action, a very high population
of microorganisms occurs in the root system, in zones of aerobic, anoxic, and anaerobic
conditions. As the waste water moves very slowly through the mass of reed roots, this
liquid can be successfully treated. The reason why they are so effective is often because
within the bed’s root sector, natural biological, physical and chemical processes interact
with one another to degrade or remove a good range of pollutants.


Dirty water from households, farms and factories consume a lot of oxygen in the water,
which will lead to the death of aquatic creatures. Several aquatic plants are important in
purifying water. They not only absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen into the water,
improving the environment for fish, but absorb nutrients from the welter as well. Britain and
the G.S. differ in their preference of plants to purify water. Bulrushes (Scirpus spp.) and
rushes (Juncus spp.) are excellent water purifiers. They remove excess nutrients from the
water as well as oil and bacteria such as Escherichia coli and Salmonella. However, algae
grow freely in summer and die off in winter. Their remains foul the bottom of the pool.


Artificial reed beds purify water in both horizontal and downflow ways. The reeds succeed
best when a dense layer of root hairs has formed. It takes three years for the roots to fully
develop. Which type of wetland a certain country applies varies widely depending on the
country in Europe and its main lines of development. Besides the development of
horizontal or vertical flow wetlands for wastewater treatment, the use of wetlands for sludge
treatment has been very successful in Europe. Some special design lines offer the
retention of microbiological organisms in constructed wetlands, the treatment of agricultural
wastewater, treatment of some kinds of industrial wastewater, and the control of diffuse
pollution.


If the water is slightly polluted, a horizontal system is used. Horizontal-flow wetlands may
be of two types: free-water surface-flow (FWF) or sub-surface water-flow (SSF). In the
former the effluent flows freely above the sand/gravel bed in which the reeds etc. are
planted; in the latter effluent passes through the sand/gravel bed. In FWF-type wetlands,
effluent is treated by plant stems, leaves and rhizomes. Such FWF wetlands are densely
planted and typically have water-depths of less than 0.4m. However, dense planting can
limit the diffusion of oxygen into the water.


These systems work particularly well for low strength effluents or effluents that have
undergone some forms of pretreatment and play an invaluable role in tertiary treatment and
the polishing of effluents. The horizontal reed flow system uses a long reed bed, where the
liquid slowly flows horizontally through. The length of the reed bed is about 100 meters.
The downside of horizontal reed beds is that they use up lots of land space and they do
take quite a long time to produce clean water.


A vertical flow (downflow) reed bed is a sealed, gravel filled trench with reeds growing in it.
The reeds in a downflow system are planted in a bed 60cm deep. In vertical flow reed
beds, the wastewater is applied to the top of the reed bed, flows down through a rhizome
zone with sludge as a substrate, then through a root zone with sand as a substrate,
followed by a layer of gravel for drainage, and is collected in an under drainage system of
large stones.


The effluent flows onto the surface of the bed and percolates slowly through the different
layers into an outlet pipe, which leads to a horizontal flow bed where it is cleaned by
millions of bacteria, algae, fungi, and microorganisms that digest the waste, including
sewage. There is no standing water so there should be no unpleasant smells.


Vertical flow reed bed systems are much more effective than horizontal flow reedbeds not
only in reducing biochemical oxygen demanded (BOD) and suspended solids (SS) levels
but also in reducing ammonia levels and eliminating smells. Usually considerably smaller
than horizontal flow beds, they are capable of handling muc stronger effluents which
contain heavily polluted matters and have a longer lifetime value. A vertical reed bed
system works more efficiently than a horizontal reed bed system, but it requires more
management, and its reed beds are often operated for a few days then rested, so several
beds and a distribution system are needed.


The natural way of water purification has many advantages over the conventional
mechanism. The natural way requires less expenditure for installation, operation and
maintenance. Besides, it looks attractive and can improve the surrounding landscape.
Reed beds are natural habitats found in floodplains, waterlogged depressions and
estuaries. The natural bed systems are a biologically proved, an environmentally friendly
and visually unobtrusive way of treating wastewater, and have the extra virtue of frequently
being better than mechanical wastewater treatment systems.
Over the medium to long term reed bed systems are, in most cases, more cost effective to
install than any other wastewater treatment. They are naturally environmentally sound
protecting groundwater, dams, creeks, rivers and estuaries.

Questions 1-3

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage?
In boxes 14-16 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
1..................... The reed bed system is a conventional method for water treatment in urban
areas.

2..................... In the reed roots, there is a series of processes that help break down the
pollutants.
3..................... Escherichia coli is the most difficult bacteria to eliminate.


Questions 4-6

Complete the diagram below.
Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS from the passage for each answer.

4.....................

5.....................

6.....................


Question 7-11
Use the information in the passage to match the advantages and disadvantages of the two
systems: horizontal flow system and down-flow system (listed A—H) below.
Write the appropriate letters A-H in boxes 7-11 on your answer sheet.

The advantage of the downflow system is 7.....................; however, 8.....................
and 9...................... The two advantages of the horizontal system are 10.....................
and 11...................... In comparison with the downflow system, the horizontal system is less
effective.

A. it requires several beds
B. it is easier to construct
C. it builds on a gradient
D. it doesn’t need much attention
E. it produces less sludges
F. it isn’t always working
G. it needs deeper bed
H. it can deal with more heavily polluted water


Questions 12-13

Choose two correct letters, from the following A, B, C, D or E
Write your answers in boxes 12-13 on your answer sheet
What are the TWO advantages of the natural water purification system mentioned in the
passage:
A It uses micro-organisms
B It involves a low operating cost
C It prevents flooding1
D1 It is visually good-looking
E1 It can function in all climates

Solution:

1. FALSE 8. A
2. TRUE 9. F

3. NOT GIVEN 10. B
4. sludge 11. D

5. sand 12. B
6. gravel 13. D

7. H
