TITLE: What destroyed the civilisation of Easter Island?
INDEX: 613
============================================================

What destroyed the civilisation of Easter Island?

A

Easter Island, or Rapu Nui as it is known locally, is home to several hundred ancient
human statues - the moai. After this remote Pacific island was settled by the Polynesians, it
remained isolated for centuries. All the energy and resources that went into the moai -
some of which are ten metres tall and weigh over 7,000 kilos - came from the island itself.
Yet when Dutch explorers landed in 1722, they met a Stone Age culture. The moai were
carved with stone tools, then transported for many kilometres, without the use of animals or
wheels, to massive stone platforms. The identity of the moai builders was in doubt until well
into the twentieth century. Thor Heyerdahl, the Norwegian ethnographer and adventurer,
thought the statues had been created by pre-Inca peoples from Peru. Bestselling Swiss
author Erich von Daniken believed they were built by stranded extraterrestrials.
Modern science - linguistic, archaeological and genetic evidence - has definitively
proved the moai builders were Polynesians, but not how they moved their creations. Local
folklore maintains that the statues walked, while researchers have tended to assume the
ancestors dragged the statues somehow, using ropes and logs.

B

When the Europeans arrived, Rapa Nui was grassland, with only a few scrawny trees. In
the 1970s and 1980s, though, researchers found pollen preserved in lake sediments, which
proved the island had been covered in lush palm forests for thousands of years. Only after
the Polynesians arrived did those forests disappear. US scientist Jared Diamond believes
that the Rapanui people - descendants of Polynesian settlers - wrecked their own
environment. They had unfortunately settled on an extremely fragile island - dry, cool, and
too remote to be properly fertilised by windblown volcanic ash. When the islanders cleared
the forests for firewood and farming, the forests didn’t grow back. As trees became scarce
and they could no longer construct wooden canoes for fishing, they ate birds. Soil erosion
decreased their crop yields. Before Europeans arrived, the Rapanui had descended into
civil war and cannibalism, he maintains. The collapse of their isolated civilisation, Diamond
writes, is a ’worst-case scenario for what may lie ahead of us in our own future’.

C

The moai, he thinks, accelerated the self-destruction. Diamond interprets them as power
displays by rival chieftains who, trapped on a remote little island, lacked other ways of
asserting their dominance. They competed by building ever bigger figures. Diamond thinks
they laid the moai on wooden sledges, hauled over log rails, but that required both a lot of
wood and a lot of people. To feed the people, even more land had to be cleared. When the
wood was gone and civil war began, the islanders began toppling the moai. By the
nineteenth century none were standing.
D

Archaeologists Terry Hunt of the University of Hawaii and Carl Lipo of California State
University agree that Easter Island lost its lush forests and that it was an ‘ecological
catastrophe' - but they believe the islanders themselves weren’t to blame. And the moai
certainly weren’t. Archaeological excavations indicate that the Rapanui went to heroic
efforts to protect the resources of their wind-lashed, infertile fields. They built thousands of
circular stone windbreaks and gardened inside them, and used broken volcanic rocks to
keep the soil moist. In short, Hunt and Lipo argue, the prehistoric Rapanui were pioneers of
sustainable farming.

E

Hunt and Lipo contend that moai-building was an activity that helped keep the peace
between islanders. They also believe that moving the moai required few people and no
wood, because they were walked upright. On that issue, Hunt and Lipo say, archaeological
evidence backs up Rapanui folklore. Recent experiments indicate that as few as 18 people
could, with three strong ropes and a bit of practice, easily manoeuvre a 1,000 kg moai
replica a few hundred metres. The figures’ fat bellies tilted them forward, and a D-shaped
base allowed handlers to roll and rock them side to side.

F
Moreover, Hunt and Lipo are convinced that the settlers were not wholly responsible for the
loss of the island’s trees. Archaeological finds of nuts from the extinct Easter Island palm
show tiny grooves, made by the teeth of Polynesian rats. The rats arrived along with the
settlers, and in just a few years, Hunt and Lipo calculate, they would have overrun the
island. They would have prevented the reseeding of the slow-growing palm trees and
thereby doomed Rapa Nui’s forest, even without the settlers’ campaign of deforestation. No
doubt the rats ate birds’ eggs too. Hunt and Lipo also see no evidence that Rapanui
civilisation collapsed when the palm forest did. They think its population grew rapidly and
then remained more or less stable until the arrival of the Europeans, who introduced
deadly diseases to which islanders had no immunity. Then in the nineteenth century
slave traders decimated the population, which shrivelled to 111 people by 1877.
G

Hunt and Lipo’s vision, therefore, is one of an island populated by peaceful and ingenious
moai builders and careful stewards of the land, rather than by reckless destroyers ruining
their own environment and society. ‘Rather than a case of abject failure, Rapu Nui is an
unlikely story of success’, they claim. Whichever is the case, there are surely some
valuable lessons which the world at large can learn from the story of Rapa Nui.

Questions 1-7

Reading Passage has seven paragraphs, A-G.

Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-ix, in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet.


List of Headings
i Evidence of innovative environment management practices
ii An undisputed answer to a question about the moai
iii The future of the moai statues
iv A theory which supports a local belief
v The future of Easter Island
vi Two opposing views about the Rapanui people
vii Destruction outside the inhabitants’ control
viii How the statues made a situation worse
ix Diminishing food resources


1 Paragraph A 1.....................

2 Paragraph B 2.....................

3 Paragraph C 3.....................

4 Paragraph D 4.....................

5 Paragraph E 5.....................
6 Paragraph F 6.....................

7 Paragraph G 7.....................


Questions 8-11

Complete the summary below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 8-11 on your answer sheet.


Jared Diamond’s View
Diamond believes that the Polynesian settlers on Rapa Nui destroyed its forests,
cutting down its trees for fuel and clearing land for 8.....................

Twentieth-century discoveries of pollen prove that Rapu Nui had once been covered in
palm forests, which had turned into grassland by the time the Europeans arrived on the
island.

When the islanders were no longer able to build the 9..................... they needed to go
fishing, they began using the island’s 10..................... as a food source, according to
Diamond.

Diamond also claims that the moai were built to show the power of the island’s
chieftains, and that the methods of transporting the statues needed not only a great
number of people, but also a great deal of 11.....................


Questions 12-13

Choose TWO letters, A-E.

Write the correct letters in boxes 12-13 on your answer sheet.

On what points do Hunt and Lipo disagree with

Diamond?

A the period when the moai were created

B how the moai were transported

C the impact of the moai on Rapanui society

D how the moai were carved

E the origins of the people who made the moai

Solution:

1. ii 8. farming
2. ix 9. canoes

3. viii 10. birds
4. i 11. wood

5. iv 12. B,C IN EITHER ORDER
6. vii 13. B,C IN EITHER ORDER

7. vi
