TITLE: What’s the purpose of gaining knowledge?
INDEX: 622
============================================================

What’s the purpose of gaining knowledge?

A

‘I would found an institution where any person can find instruction in any subject' That was
the founders motto for Cornell University, and it seems an apt characterization of the
different university, also in the USA, where I currently teach philosophy. A student can
prepare for a career in resort management, engineering, interior design, accounting, music,
law enforcement, you name it. But what would the founders of these two institutions have
thought of a course called Arson for Profit’? I kid you not: we have it on the books. Any
undergraduates who have met the academic requirements can sign up for the course in our
program in 'fire science’.
B

Naturally, the course is intended for prospective arson investigators, who can learn all the
tricks of the trade for detecting whether a fire was deliberately set, discovering who did it,
and establishing a chain of evidence for effective prosecution in a court of law. But wouldn’t
this also be the perfect course for prospective arsonists to sign up for? My point is not to
criticize academic programs in fire science: they are highly welcome as part of the
increasing professionalization of this and many other occupations. However, it’s not
unknown for a firefighter to torch a building. This example suggests how dishonest and
illegal behavior, with the help of higher education, can creep into every aspect of public and
business life.

C

I realized this anew when I was invited to speak before a class in marketing, which is
another of our degree programs. The regular instructor is a colleague who appreciates the
kind of ethical perspective I can bring as a philosopher. There are endless ways I could
have approached this assignment, but I took my cue from the title of the course: 'Principles
of Marketing’. It made me think to ask the students, 'Is marketing principled?’ After all, a
subject matter can have principles in the sense of being codified, having rules, as with
football or chess, without being principled in the sense of being ethical. Many of the
students immediately assumed that the answer to my question about marketing principles
was obvious: no. Just look at the ways in which everything under the sun has been
marketed; obviously it need not be done in a principled (=ethical) fashion.

D

Is that obvious? I made the suggestion, which may sound downright crazy in light of the
evidence, that perhaps marketing is by definition principled. My inspiration for this
judgement is the philosopher Immanuel Kant, who argued that any body of knowledge
consists of an end (or purpose) and a means.

E

Let us apply both the terms 'means' and ‘end' to marketing. The students have signed up
for a course in order to learn how to market effectively. But to what end? There seem to be
two main attitudes toward that question. One is that the answer is obvious: the purpose of
marketing is to sell things and to make money. The other attitude is that the purpose of
marketing is irrelevant: Each person comes to the program and course with his or her own
plans, and these need not even concern the acquisition of marketing expertise as such. My
proposal, which I believe would also be Kant's, is that neither of these attitudes captures
the significance of the end to the means for marketing. A field of knowledge or a
professional endeavor is defined by both the means and the end;hence both deserve
scrutiny. Students need to study both how to achieve X, and also what X is.
F

It is at this point that ‘Arson for Profit’ becomes supremely relevant. That course is
presumably all about means: how to detect and prosecute criminal activity. It is therefore
assumed that the end is good in an ethical sense. When I ask fire science students to
articulate the end, or purpose, of their field, they eventually generalize to something like,
‘The safety and welfare of society,’ which seems right. As we have seen, someone could
use the very same knowledge of means to achieve a much less noble end, such as
personal profit via destructive, dangerous, reckless activity. But we would not call that
firefighting. We have a separate word for it: arson. Similarly, if you employed the ‘principles
of marketing’ in an unprincipled way, you would not be doing marketing. We have another
term for it: fraud. Kant gives the example of a doctor and a poisoner, who use the identical
knowledge to achieve their divergent ends. We would say that one is practicing medicine,
the other, murder.

Questions 1-6

Reading Passage has six sections, A-F.

Choose the correct heading for each section from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-viii, in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.

1..................... Section A

2..................... Section B
3..................... Section C

4..................... Section D

5..................... Section E

6..................... Section F

List of Headings

Courses that require a high level of commitment
i


A course title with two meanings
ii
The equal importance of two key issues
iii
iv Applying a theory in an unexpected context
v The financial benefits of studying
vi A surprising course title
vii Different names for different outcomes
viii The possibility of attracting the wrong kind of student


Questions 7-10


Complete the summary below.
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 7-10 on your answer sheet.


The ‘Arson for Profit’ course
This is a university course intended for students who are undergraduates and who are
studying 7...................... The expectation is that they will become 8.....................
specialising in arson. The course will help them to detect cases of arson and find
9..................... of criminal intent, leading to successful 10..................... in the courts.


Questions 11-14

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage?
In boxes 11-14 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement agrees with the views of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the views of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this


11..................... It is difficult to attract students onto courses that do not focus on a
career.

12..................... The ‘Arson for Profit’ course would be useful for people intending to set
fire to buildings.

13..................... Fire science courses are too academic to help people to be good at the
job of firefighting.

14..................... The writer’s fire science students provided a detailed definition of the
purpose of their studies.

Solution:

1. vi 8. investigators
2. viii 9. evidence

3. ii 10. prosecution
4. iv 11. NOT GIVEN

5. iii 12. YES
6. vii 13. NO

7. fire science 14. NO
