TITLE: When people are deaf’ to music
INDEX: 625
============================================================

When people are deaf’ to music

Music has long been considered a uniquely human concept. In fact, most psychologists
agree that music is a universal human instinct. Like any ability, however, there is great
variation in people's musical competence. For every brilliant pianist in the world, there are
several people we refer to as " tone deaf". It is not simply that people with tone deafness
(or' amusia") are unable to sing in tune, they are also unable to discriminate between tones
or recognize familiar melodies. Such a" disorder" can occur after some sort of brain
damage , but recently research has been undertaken in an attempt to discover the cause of
congenital amusia (when people are born with the condition), which is not associated with
any brain damage, hearing problems, or lack of exposure to music.

According to the research of Dr. Isabelie Peretz of the University of Montreat, amusia is
more complicated than the inability to distinguish pitches. An amusia (a person who has the
condition of amusia) can distinguish between two pitches that are far apart, but cannot tell
the difference between intervals smaller than a half step on the Western diatonic scale,
while most people can easily distinguish differences smaller than that, when listening to
melodies which have had a single note altered so that it is out of key with the rest of the
melody, do not notice a problem. As would be expected, amusics perform significantly
worse at singing and tapping a rhythm along with a melody than do non-amusics.

The most fascinating aspect of amusia is how specific to music it is. Because of music’s
close ties
to language, it might be expected that a musical impairment may be caused by a language
impairment. Studies suggest, however, that language and music ability are independent of
one another. People with brain damage in areas critical to language are often still able to
sing, despite being unable to communicate through speech. Moreover, while amusics show
deficiencies in their recognition of pitch differences in melodies, they show no tonal
languages, such as Chinese, do not report having any difficulty discriminating between
words that differ only in their intonation. The linguistic cues inherent in speech make
discrimination of meaning much easier for amusics. Amusics are also successful most of
the time at detecting the mood of a melody, can identify a speaker based on his or her
voice and can discriminate and identify environmental sounds.

Recent work has been focused on locating the part of the brain that is responsible for
amusia. The temporal lobes of the brain, the location of the primary auditory cortex, have
been considered. It has long been believed that the temporal lobes, especially the right
temporal lobe, are most active when activity, so any musical disability should logically stem
from here as well. Because it has been shown that there is no hearing deficit in amusia,
researchers moved on to the temporal neocortex, which is where more sophisticated
processing of musical cues was thought to take place. New studies, however, have
suggested that the deficits in amusics are located outside the auditory cortex. Brain scans
of amusics do not show any reaction at all to differences smaller than a half step, when
changes in tones are large, their brains overreact, showing twice as much activity on the
right side of the brain as a normal brain hearing the same thing. These differences do not
occur in the auditory cortex, indicating again that the deficits of amusia lie mostly in hearing
impairment, but in higher processing of melodies.

So what does this all mean? Looking only at the research of Peretz in the field of
neuropsychology of music, it would appear that amusia is some sort of disorder. As a
student of neurobiology, however, I am skeptical. Certainly the studies by Peretz that have
found significant differences between the brains of so-called amusics and normal brains
are legitimate. The more important question now becomes one of normality. Every trait
from skin color to intelligence to mood exists on a continuum-there is a great idea of
variation from one extreme to the other. Just because we recognize that basic musical
ability is something that the vast majority of people have, this doesn’t mean that the lack of
it is abnormal

What makes an amusic worse off than a musical prodigy? Musical ability is culturally
valued, and may have been a factor in survival at one point in human history, but it does
not seem likely that it is being selected for on an evolutionary scale any longer. Darwin
believed that music was adaptive as a way of finding a mate, but who needs to be able to
sing to find a partner in an age when it is possible to express your emotions through a song
on your IPod?

While the idea of amusia is interesting, it seems to be just one end of the continuum of
innate musical ability. Comparing this ‘disorder’ to learning disorders like a specific
language impairment seems to be going too far. Before, amusia can be declared a
disability, further research must be done to determine whether lack of musical ability is
actually detrimental in any way. If no disadvantages can be found of having amusia, then it
is no more a disability than having poor fashion sense or bad handwriting.

Question 1-5

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D

Write the correct letter in boxes 27-31 on your answer sheet

1. What does the writer tell US about people with tone deafness (amusia) in the first
paragraph?

A They usually have hearing problems
B Some can play a musical instrument very well

C Some may be able to sing well-known melodies
D They have several inabilities in regard to music

2. What is the writer doing in the second paragraph?

A outlining some of factors that cause amusia

B summarising some findings about people with amusia

C suggesting that people with amusia are disadvantaged

D comparing the sing ability of amusia with their sense

3. What does the writer say about the relationship between language ability and musical
ability?

A People who are unable to speak can sometimes sing

B People with amusia usually have language problems too
C Speakers of tonal languages like Chinese rarely have amusia

D People with amusia have difficulty recognizing people by their voices

4. In the third paragraph, the writer notes that most amusics are able to

A learn how to sing in tune

B identify a song by its tune

C distinguish a sad tone from a happy tune

D recognise when a singer is not sing in tune

5. What is the writer doing in the fourth paragraph?
A claiming that amusics have problems in the auditory cortex

B outlining progress in understanding the brains of amusics
C proving that amuisa is located in the temporal lobes
D explaining why studies of hearing are difficult

Question 6-9

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage?

In boxes 6-9 on your answer sheet, write

YES if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer

NO if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
6..................... Perezt's research suggesting that amusia is a disorder is
convincing.
7..................... People with musical ability are happier than those without this
ability.
8..................... It is inappropriate to consider amusia as real disorder.

9..................... People with amusia often have bad handwriting.


Question 10-14

Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-H below

Write the correct letter, A-H in boxes 10-14 on your answer sheet

10..................... The reason why some people are born with amusia is

11..................... One of the difficulties amusia experience is

12..................... For amusia, discrimination of meaning in speech is

13..................... Certain reactions in the brain of an amusia are

14..................... In most cultures, musical ability is
Aan inability to hear when spoken language rises and falls.

Bconsidered to be desirable.
Can inability to follow the beat of music.

Dnot a problem.
Enot yet well understood.

F a result of injury to the mother.

Gmore marked that with other people.
Hassociated with intelligence.

Solution:

1. D 8. YES
2. B 9. NOT GIVEN

3. A 10. E
4. C 11. C

5. B 12. D
6. NO 13. G

7. NOT GIVEN 14. B
