TITLE: White mountain, green tourism
INDEX: 628
============================================================

White mountain, green tourism

The French Alpine town of Chamonix has been a magnet for tourists since the 18th
century. But today, tourism and climate change are putting pressure on the surrounding
environment. Marc Grainger reports.

A

The town of Chamonix-Mont-Blanc sits in a valley at 1,035 metres above sea level in the
Haute-Savoie department in south-eastern France. To the northwest are the red peaks of
the Aiguilles Rouges massif; to the south-east are the permanently white peaks of Mont
Blanc, which at 4,810 metres is the highest mountain in the Alps. It’s a typical Alpine
environment, but one that is under increasing strain from the hustle and bustle of human
activity.

B

Tourism is Chamonix’s lifeblood. Visitors have been encouraged to visit the valley ever
since it was discovered by explorers in 1741. Over 40 years later, in 1786,

Mont Blanc’s summit was finally reached by a French doctor and his guide, and this gave
birth to the sport of alpinism, with Chamonix at its centre. In 1924, it hosted the first Winter
Olympics, and the cable cars and lifts that were built in the years that followed gave
everyone access to the ski slopes.

C

Today, Chamonix is a modern town, connected to the outside world via the Mont Blanc
Road Tunnel and a busy highway network. It receives up to 60,000 visitors at a time during
the ski season, and climbers, hikers and extreme-sports enthusiasts swarm there in the
summer in even greater numbers, swelling the town’s population to 100,000. It is the third
most visited natural site in the world, according to Chamonix’s Tourism Office and, last
year, it had 5.2 million visitor bed nights - all this in a town with fewer than 10,000
permanent inhabitants.

D

This influx of tourists has put the local environment under severe pressure, and the
authorities in the valley have decided to take action. Educating visitors is vital. Tourists are
warned not to drop rubbish, and there are now recycling points dotted all around the valley,
from the town centre to halfway up the mountains. An internet blog reports environmental
news in the town, and the ‘green’ message is delivered with all the tourist office’s activities.

E

Low-carbon initiatives are also important for the region. France is committed to reducing its
carbon emissions by a factor of four by 2050. Central to achieving this aim is a strategy that
encourages communities to identify their carbon emissions on a local level and make plans
to reduce them. Studies have identified that accommodation accounts for half of all
carbon emissions in the Chamonix valley. Hotels are known to be inefficient operations, but
those around Chamonix are now cleaning up their act. Some are using low-energy lighting,
restricting water use and making recycling bins available for guests; others have invested
in huge projects such as furnishing and decorating using locally sourced materials, using
geothermal energy for heating and installing solar panels.

F

Chamonix’s council is encouraging the use of renewable energy in private properties too,
by making funds available for green renovations and new constructions. At the same time,
public- sector buildings have also undergone improvements to make them more energy
efficient and less wasteful. For example, the local ice rink has reduced its annual water
consumption from 140,000 cubic metres to 10,000 cubic metres in the space of three
years.
G

Improving public transport is another feature of the new policy, as 80 percent of
carbon emissions from transport used to come from private vehicles. While the Mont Blanc
Express is an ideal way to travel within the valley - and see some incredible scenery along
the route - it is much more difficult to arrive in Chamonix from outside by rail. There is no
direct line from the closest airport in Geneva, so tourists arriving by air normally transfer by
car or bus. However, at a cost of 3.3 million euros a year, Chamonix has introduced a free
shuttle service in order to get people out of their cars and into buses fitted with particle
filters.

H

If the valley’s visitors and residents want to know why they need to reduce their
environmental impact, they just have to look up; the effects of climate change are there for
everyone to see in the melting glaciers that cling to the mountains. The fragility of the
Alpine environment has long been a concern among local people. Today, 70 percent of the
805 square kilometres that comprise Chamonix-Mont-Blanc is protected in some way. But
now, the impact of tourism has led the authorities to recognise that more must be done if
the valley is to remain prosperous: that they must not only protect the natural environment
better, but also manage the numbers of visitors better, so that its residents can happily
remain there.

Questions 1-5

Reading Passage 2 has eight paragraphs, A-H.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

You may use any letter more than once.

1..................... a list of the type of people who enjoy going to Chamonix

2..................... reference to a system that is changing the way visitors reach Chamonix
3..................... the geographical location of Chamonix

4..................... mention of the need to control the large tourist population in Chamonix

5..................... reference to a national environmental target


Questions 6-7

Choose TWO letters, A-E.

The writer mentions several ways that the authorities aim to educate tourists in Chamonix.

Which TWO of the following ways are mentioned?

A giving instructions about litter

B imposing fines on people who drop litter

C handing out leaflets in the town

D operating a web-based information service

E having a paper-free tourist office


Questions 8-9

Choose TWO letters, A-E.

The writer mentions several ways that hotels are reducing their carbon emissions.
Which TWO of the following ways are mentioned?

A using natural cleaning materials

B recycling water

C limiting guest numbers

D providing places for rubbish

E harnessing energy from the sun

Questions 10-13

Complete the sentences below.

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.

10 The first people to discover the Chamonix valley were 10.....................

11 Chamonix’s busiest tourist season is the 11.....................

12 Public areas, such as the 12..................... in Chamonix, are using fewer resources.
13 The 13..................... on the mountains around Chamonix provide visual evidence of
global warming.

Solution:

8. D OR E IN
1. C
EITHER ORDER
9. D OR E IN
2. G
EITHER ORDER
3. A 10. explorers
4. H 11. summer
5. E 12. . ice rink

6. A OR D IN
13. glaciers
EITHER ORDER
7. A OR D IN
EITHER ORDER
