TITLE: Why are so few tigers man-eaters?
INDEX: 629
============================================================

Why are so few tigers man-eaters?

A. As you leave the Bandhavgarh National Park in central India, there is a notice which
shows a huge, placid tiger. The notice says, ‘You may not have seen me, but I have seen
you.’ There are more than a billion people In India and Indian tigers probably see humans
every single day of their lives. Tigers can and do kill almost everything they meet in the
jungle, they will kill even attack elephants and rhino. Surely, then, it is a little strange that
attacks o humans are not more frequent.

B. Some people might argue that these attacks were in fact common in the past. British
writers of adventure stories, such as Jim Corbett, gave the impression that village life in

India in the early years of the twentieth century involved a stage of constant siege by man-
eating tigers. But they may have overstated the terror spread by tigers. There were also far
more tigers around in those days (probably 60.000 in the subcontinent compared to just
3000 today). So in proportion, attacks appear to have been as rare then as they are today.

C. It is widely assumed that the constraint is fear; but what exactly are tigers afraid of? Can
they really know that we may be even better armed that they are? Surely not. Has the
species programmed the experiences of all tigers with humans its genes to be inherited as
instinct? Perhaps. But I think the explanation may be more simple and, in a way, more
intriguing.

D. Since the growth of ethology in the 1950s. we have tried to understand animal behaviour
from the animal’s point of view. Until the first elegant experiments by pioneers in the field
such as Konrad Lorenz, naturalists wrote about animals as if they were slightly less
intelligent humans. Jim Corbett’s breathless accounts of his duels with a an-eaters in truth
tell us more about Jim Corbett than they do about the animals. The principle of ethology, on
the other hand, requires us to attempt to think in the same way as the animal we are
studying thinks, and to observe every tiny detail of its behaviour without imposing our own
human significances on its actions.

E. I suspect that a tiger’s afraid of humans lies not in some preprogramed ancestral logic
but in the way he actually perceives us visually. If you think like a tiger, a human in a car
might appear just to be a part of the car, and because tigers don’t eat cars the human is
safe-unless the car is menacing the tiger or its cubs, in which case a brave or enraged tiger
may charge. A human on foot is a different sort of puzzle. Imagine a tiger sees a man who
is 1.8m tall. A tigeris less than Im tall but they may be up to 3m long from head to tail. So
when a tiger sees the man face on, it might not be unreasonable for him to assume that the
man is 6m long. If he meet a deer of this size, he might attack the animal by leaping on its
back, but when he looks behind the mind he can’t see a back. From the front the man is
huge, but looked at from the side he all but disappears. This must be very disconcerting. A
hunter has to be confident that it can tackle its prey, and no one is confident when they are
disconcerted. This is especially true of a solitary hunter such as the tiger and may explain
why lions-particularly young lionesses who tend to encourage one another to take risks are
more dangerous than tigers.

F. If the theory that a tiger is disconcerted to find that a standing human is both very big
and yet somehow invisible is correct, the opposite should be true of a squatting human. A
squatting human is half he size and presents twice the spread of back, and more closely
resembles a medium-sized deer. If tigers were simply frightened of all humans, then a
squatting person would be no more attractive as a target than a standing one. This,
however appears not to be the case. Many incidents of attacks on people involving
villagers squatting or bending over to cut grass for fodder or building material.

G. The fact that humans stand upright may therefore not just be something that
distinguishes them from nearly all other species, but also a factor that helped them to
survive in a dangerous and unpredictable environment.

Note:

Ethology = the branch of zoology that studies the behaviour of animals in their
natural habitats

Questions 1-5

Reading Passage 2 has seven paragraphs labelled A-G

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter A-G in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.

1..................... a rejected explanation of why tiger attacks on humans are rare

2..................... a reason why tiger attacks on humans might be expected to happen
more often than they do

3..................... examples of situations in which humans are more likely to be attacked
by tigers

4..................... a claim about the relative frequency of tiger attacks on humans
5..................... an explanation of tiger behaviour based on the principles of
ethology


Questions 6-10

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 2?

In boxes 6-10 on your answer sheet write
TRUE if the statement agrees with the information

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this

6..................... Tigers in the Bandhavgarh National Park are a protected species.

7..................... Some writers of fiction have exaggerated the danger of tigers to man.

8..................... The fear of humans may be passed down in a tiger's genes.

9..................... Konrad Lorenz claimed that some animals are more intelligent than
humans.

10..................... Ethology involves applying principles of human behaviour to
animals.


Questions 11-13

Choose the correct answer, A. B C or D

Write your answers in boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet.

11. Why do tigers rarely attack people in cars?

A They have learned that cars are not dangerous.
B They realise that people in cars cannot be harmed.

C They do not think people in cars are living creatures.

D They do not want to put their cubs at risk.

12. The writer says that tigers rarely attack a man who is standing up because

A they are afraid of the man s height.
B they are confused by the man's shape.

C they are puzzled by the man s lack of movement.

D they are unable to look at the man directly.

13. A human is more vulnerable to tiger attack when squatting because

A he may be unaware of the tiger's approach.

B he cannot easily move his head to see behind him.

C his head becomes a better target for the tiger.

D his back appears longer in relation to his height.

Solution:

1. C 8. TRUE
2. A 9. NOT GIVEN

3. F 10. FALSE
4. B 11. C

5. E 12. B
6. NOT GIVEN 13. D

7. TRUE
