TITLE: Why Risks Can Go Wrong
INDEX: 634
============================================================

Why Risks Can Go Wrong

Human intuition is a bad guide to handling risk


A. People make terrible decisions about the future. The evidence is all around, from their
investments in the stock markets to the way they run their businesses. In fact, people are
consistently bad at dealing with uncertainty, underestimating some kinds of risk and
overestimating others. Surely there must be a better way than using intuition?


B. In the 1960s a young American research psychologist, Daniel Kahneman, became
interested in people's inability to make logical decisions. That launched him on a career to
show just how irrationally people behave in practice. When Kahneman and his colleagues
first started work, the idea of applying psychological insights to economics and business
decisions was seen as rather bizarre. But in the past decade the fields of behavioural
finance and behavioural economics have blossomed, and in 2002 Kahneman shared a
Nobel prize in economics for his work. Today he is in demand by business organizations
and international banking companies. But, he says, there are plenty of institutions that still
fail to understand the roots of their poor decisions. He claims that, far from being random,
these mistakes are systematic and predictable.

C. One common cause of problems in decision-making is over-optimism. Ask most
people about the future, and they will see too much blue sky ahead, even if past
experience suggests otherwise. Surveys have shown that people's forecasts of
future stock market movements are far more optimistic than past long-term returns
would justify. The same goes for their hopes of ever-rising prices for their homes or
doing well in games of chance. Such optimism can be useful for managers or
sportsmen, and sometimes turns into a self-fulfilling prophecy. But most of the time
it results in wasted effort and dashed hopes. Kahneman's work points to three types
of over-confidence. First, people tend to exaggerate their own skill and prowess; in
polls, far fewer than half the respondents admit to having below-average skills in,
say, driving. Second, they overestimate the amount of control they have over the
future, forgetting about luck and chalking up success solely to skill. And third, in
competitive pursuits such as dealing on shares, they forget that they have to judge
their skills against those of the competition.

D. Another source of wrong decisions is related to the decisive effect of the initial
meeting, particularly in negotiations over money. This is referred to as the 'anchor
effect'. Once a figure has been mentioned, it takes a strange hold over the human
mind. The asking price quoted in a house sale, for example, tends to become
accepted by all parties as the 'anchor' around which negotiations take place. Much
the same goes for salary negotiations or mergers and acquisitions. If nobody has
much information to go on, a figure can provide comfort - even though it may lead to
a terrible mistake.

E. In addition, mistakes may arise due to stubbornness. No one likes to abandon a
cherished belief, and the earlier a decision has been taken, the harder it is to
abandon it. Drug companies must decide early to cancel a failing research project to
avoid wasting money, but may find it difficult to admit they have made a mistake. In
the same way, analysts may have become wedded early to a single explanation that
coloured their perception. A fresh eye always helps.

F. People also tend to put a lot of emphasis on things they have seen and
experienced themselves, which may not be the best guide to decision-making. For
example, somebody may buy an overvalued share because a relative has made
thousands on it, only to get his fingers burned. In finance, too much emphasis on
information close at hand helps to explain the tendency by most investors to invest
only within the country they live in. Even though they know that diversification is
good for their portfolio, a large majority of both Americans and Europeans invest far
too heavily in the shares of their home countries. They would be much better off
spreading their risks more widely.

G. More information is helpful in making any decision but, says Kahneman, people
spend proportionally too much time on small decisions and not enough on big ones.
They need to adjust the balance. During the boom years, some companies put as
much effort into planning their office party as into considering strategic mergers.

H. Finally, crying over spilled milk is not just a waste of time; it also often colours
people's perceptions of the future. Some stock market investors trade far too
frequently because they are chasing the returns on shares they wish they had
bought earlier.

I. Kahneman reckons that some types of businesses are much better than others at
dealing with risk. Pharmaceutical companies, which are accustomed to many
failures and a few big successes in their drug-discovery programmes, are fairly
rational about their risk-taking. But banks, he says, have a long way to go. They may
take big risks on a few huge loans, but are extremely cautious about their much
more numerous loans to small businesses, many of which may be less risky than
the big ones. And the research has implications for governments too. They face a
whole range of sometimes conflicting political pressures, which means they are
even more likely to take irrational decisions.

Questions 1-6


Reading Passage 1 has nine paragraphs A-I.

Choose the correct heading for Paragraphs B and D-H from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number (i-xi) in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.


List of headings
i Not identifying the correct priorities
ii A solution for the long term
iii The difficulty of changing your mind
iv Why looking back is unhelpful
v Strengthening inner resources
vi A successful approach to the study of decision-making
vii The danger of trusting a global market
viii Reluctance to go beyond the familiar
ix The power of the first number
x The need for more effective risk assessment
xi Underestimating the difficulties ahead

Example Answer

Paragraph A x

Paragraph C xi

1..................... Paragraph B

2..................... Paragraph D

3..................... Paragraph E
4..................... Paragraph F

5..................... Paragraph G

6..................... Paragraph H

Questions 7-10

Choose the correct answer A, B, C or D

Write your answers in boxes 7-10 on your answer sheet.

7 People initially found Kahneman's work unusual because he

A saw mistakes as following predictable patterns.

B was unaware of behavioural approaches.
C dealt with irrational types of practice.

D applied psychology to finance and economics.

8 The writer mentions house-owners attitudes towards the value of their homes to
illustrate that

A past failures may destroy an optimistic attitude.

B people tend to exaggerate their chances of success.

C optimism may be justified in certain circumstances.

D people are influenced by the success of others.

9 Stubbornness and inflexibility can cause problems when people

A think their financial difficulties are just due to bad luck.
B avoid seeking advice from experts and analysts.

C refuse to invest in the early stages of a project.

D are unwilling to give up unsuccessful activities or beliefs.

10 Why do many Americans and Europeans fail to spread their financial risks when
investing?

A They feel safer dealing in a context which is close to home.

B They do not understand the benefits of diversification.

C They are over-influenced by the successes of their relatives.

D They do not have sufficient knowledge of one another’s countries.


Questions 11-13

Answer the questions below, using NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet.

11 Which two occupations may benefit from being over-optimistic? 11.....................
12 Which practical skill are many people over-confident about? 12.....................

13 Which type of business has a generally good attitude to dealing with
uncertainty? 13.....................

Solution:

1. vi 8. B
2. ix 9. D

3. iii 10. A
4. viii 11. managers (and/or) sportsmen

5. i 12. driving
6. iv 13. Pharmaceutical (companies)

7. D
