TITLE: Worldly Wealth
INDEX: 643
============================================================

Worldly Wealth

Can the future population of the world enjoy a comfortable lifestyle, with
possessions, space and mobility, without crippling the environment?


The world's population is expected to stabilize at around nine billion. Will it be possible for
nine billion people to have the lifestyle enjoyed today only by the wealthy? One school of
thought says no: not only should the majority of the world's people resign themselves to
poverty forever, but rich nations must also revert to simpler lifestyles in order to save the
planet.

Admittedly, there may be political or social barriers to achieving a rich world. But in fact
there seems to be no insuperable physical or ecological reason why nine billion people
should not achieve a comfortable lifestyle, using technology only slightly more advanced
than that which we now possess. In thinking about the future of civilization, we ought to
start by asking w hat people want. The evidence demonstrates that as people get richer
they w ant a greater range of personal technology, they want lots of room (preferably near
or in natural surroundings) and they w ant greater speed in travel. More possessions, more
space, more mobility.

In the developed world, the personal technologies of the wealthy, including telephones,
washing machines and ears, have become necessities within a generation or two.
Increasing productivity that results m decreasing costs for such goods has been
responsible for the greatest gains in the standard of living, and there is every reason to
believe that this will continue.

As affluence grows, the amount of energy and raw- materials used for production of
machinery w ill therefore escalate. But this need not mean an end to the machine age.
Rather than being throw n away, materials from old machinery can be recycled by
manufacturers. And long before all fossil fuels are exhausted, their rising prices may
compel industrial society not only to become more energy efficient but also to find
alternative energy sources sufficient for the demands of an advanced technological
civilization nuclear fission, nuclear fusion, solar energy, chemical photosynthesis,
geothermal, biomass or some yet unknown source of energy.

The growth of cities and suburbs is often seen as a threat to the environment. However, in
fact the increasing amount of land consumed by agriculture is a far greater danger than
urban sprawl. Stopping the growth of farms is the best way to preserve many of the world's
remaining wild areas. But is a dramatic downsizing of farmland possible? Thanks to the
grow th of agricultural productivity, reforestation and ‘re-wilding’ has been under way in the
industrial countries for generations. Since 1950 more land in the US has been set aside in
parks than has been occupied by urban and suburban growth. And much of what was
farmland in the nineteenth century is now forest again. Taking the best Iowa maize growers
as the norm for world food productivity, it has been calculated that less than a tenth of
present cropland could support a population of 10 billion.

In The Environment Game, a vision of a utopia that would be at once high-tech and
environmentalist. Nigel Calder suggested that ‘nourishing but unpalatable primary food
produced by industrial techniques - like yeast from petroleum may be fed to animals, so
that we can continue to eat our customary meat, eggs. milk, butter, and cheese and so that
people in underdeveloped countries can have adequate supplies of animal protein for the
first time.'

In the long run. tissue-cloning techniques could be used to grow desired portions of meat
by themselves. Once their DNA has been extracted to create cow less steaks and chicken
less drumsticks, domesticated species of livestock, bred for millennia to be stupid or to
have grotesquely enhanced traits, should be allowed to become extinct, except for a few
specimens in zoos. However, game such as wild deer, rabbits and wild ducks w ill be ever
more abundant as farms revert to wilderness, so this could supplement the laboratory-
grown meat in the diets of tomorrow's affluent.

With rising personal incomes come rising expectations of mobility. This is another luxury of
today’s rich that could become a necessity of tomorrow’s global population - particularly if
its members choose to live widely dispersed in a post-agrarian wilderness. In his recent
book Free Flight. James Fallows, a pilot as well as a writer, describes serious attempts by
both state and private entrepreneurs in the USA to promote an ‘air taxi' system within the
price range of today’s middle class and perhaps tomorrow’s global population.

Two of the chief obstacles to the science fiction fantasy of the personal plane or hover car
are price and danger. While technological improvements are driving prices down, piloting
an aircraft in three dimensions is still more difficult than driving a car in two. and pilot error
causes more fatalities than driver error. But before long our aircraft and cars will be piloted
by computers which arc never tired or stressed.

So perhaps there are some grounds for optimism when viewing the future of civilization.
With the help of technology, and without putting serious strains on the global environment,
possessions, space and mobility can be achieved for all the projected population of the
world.

Questions 1-6

Do the following statements reflect the claims of the writer in Reading Passage 2?

In boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet write

YES if the statement reflects the writer's claims

NO if the statement contradicts the writer's claims

NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
1..................... Today's wealthy people ignore the fact that millions are living in
poverty.
2..................... There are reasons why the future population of the world may not
enjoy a comfortable lifestyle.
3..................... The first thing to consider when planning for the future is
environmental protection.
4..................... As manufactured goods get cheaper, people will benefit more from
them.

5..................... It may be possible to find new types of raw materials for use in the
production of machinery.

6..................... The rising prices of fossil fuels may bring some benefits.


Questions 7-12

Complete the summary below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 7-12 on your answer sheet.


Space for an increased population

According to the writer, the use of land for 7..................... is the most serious threat to
the environment. However, in the US. there has already been an increase in the amount
of land used for 8..................... forests. Far less land would be required to feed the
world's population if the 9..................... of the land could be improved worldwide. It has
also been claimed that the industrial production of animal foods could allow greater
access to animal 10..................... by the entire world’s population.

Scientists could use 11..................... from domesticated animals to help produce meat
by tissue cloning, and these species could then be allowed to die out. In addition to this
type of meat. 12..................... will also be widely available.

Questions 13-14

Choose the correct answer, A. B, C or D

Write your answers in boxes 13-14 on your answer sheet.

13 Greater mobility may be a feature of the future because of changes in

A the location of housing.

B patterns of employment.
C centres of transport.

D the distribution of wealth.

14 Air transport will be safe because of

A new types of aircraft.

B better training methods.

C three-dimensional models.

D improved technology.

Solution:

1. NOT GIVEN 8. parks
2. YES 9. productivity

3. NO 10. protein
4. YES 11. DNA

5. NOT GIVEN 12. game
6. YES 13. A

7. agriculture /
14. D
farms / farmland
